+++
title = "Solo vs. Party"
date = "2024-11-25"
id = "-cG8OfcFkew"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "RPG Design", "Character Systems"]
summary = "I talk about designing CRPGs where the player controls a single character versus ones where the player controls an entire party."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Solo versus party character control.

This is something that was asked most recently. I think it's been asked several times, but it asked most recently by Tom FS, who asked: I was wondering if you could go over your thoughts on full party control versus only controlling your character. I view this separately from the full party creation versus individual character creation debate. What's the lack of party control in Arcanum due to multiplayer? I know it was that case for never winner nights.

One, first of all, good question, and I could have sworn like I was going to say swear words — that I have done this before. I have a memory of talking about it and I know people have asked it before, so maybe I thought about doing it and didn't, or maybe I just answered it in a comment and didn't make a video for it, but it has been asked a lot. I looked through my own videos. I couldn't find it, so I decided: okay, I'm going to make a video, we're going to talk about this and then when people ask in the future, I can just say, hey, look at this video. So, talking about what? When you play an RPG, whether you control just a single character or an entire group, there's a lot that be can said for this. I think if you look at the entire body of my work, you can see I've done both.

I've had it where you control a single person. Even if companions join, you do not control them. Then I've done ones where you create and control the entire group. You control everything that they do. I prefer single control and I'll talk about why. So let's compare, you know, Solo character control versus party control and I'll talk to you about, instead of doing pros and cons, I tell you what. I like about single and then I'll tell you what some of the advantages of party are, but some of the when I get to party. Ey, we'll have to talk about some downsides that literally don't exist in single. So let's talk about single first. What I love about that the most is Single.

Character control in a video game makes you the focus. You are that character. You are the hero or the villain. I'm not going to tell you how to play, I'm not the boss of you, but you're the focus when you do an action in the game, if you go up and talk to someone, if you open a door, if you open a chest, if you steal something, if you find a trap, if a trap goes off. Who did that? You did that.

It's not this amorphous spread of a bunch of different characters and one of them. Happened to trip a trap and you're like: oh Bob, you dummy, I'm moving you to the back of the party. It's you did that, you did that. What I like about that is it creat a tight integration between the player and his or her character, because if you don't have that, it becomes kind of like: well, that wasn't my fault. That dumb wizard tripped over a trap. Or that dumb fighter stepped forward to talk to the bad guy and His charisma's Four. That's stupid. These are all things that can be designed to prevent, but I like the fact that you don't have to worry about it.

In a Solo game, it's You are the character. The game can therefore be scaled to you. When you're making a game, you know it's going to be this character.

Maybe they have a companion or two, maybe they don't, but it's. You can scale the game as if you know that the player is going to make a single character with a either a particular class or a particular set of skills, and then you can test the game against that is: are these combats fun? Are these encounters fun? Are these bosses fun? And also, are they doable? Can this?

Can every class make it to the end of the game? Or every sko combination do? Are encounters doable? Are there?

Is there enough Variety in each class or across all the skills that they can deal with encounters? Are all the boss fights doable? These are things you can do when there's one character, and then adding companions tend just to make it easier. Another thing that's very, very easy to do is death.

When is your game over? When your Single Character dies? Maybe even unconsciousness won't end it, maybe you can. Go unconscious and as long as one of your companions heals you, you're, fine, but death of that one character ends the game.

So it's very clear, and then, as the original op asked, multiplayer kind of factors in. If you want to make a multiplayer game, it's kind of hard if everybody's controlling a party, because then you have to think about how fast can they do all the control which then bleeds into in single Play, Single Character games. You can do real time or turnbas combat. You can do multiplayer or single player. Um, you can do third person or first person. Those are all available to you. Once you go, one person controlling multiple characters, maybe multiplayer is not going to work, or it's going to be a lot harder. Maybe first person won't work, because how do you does?

The camera switched to whichever one. You're focused on? It could be very difficult, maybe real time is too frenetic, um, although you know I, there are Real Time games that have you control a party. They're solvable, but each one of those is a bit more of a hurdle, um, and that doesn't even exist if you're playing a single character game.

So let's just start talking about party now. Party has a lot of advantages that I think a lot of people like. If you're playing a party, you immediately have access to all the different classes and all the skills. That's fun, it's. You don't have to replay the game to see what a wizard is like compared to a Bard, compared to an assassin, compared to a thief. You can see it right there in your party. You can choose. It gives you more tactical ideas both in and out of combat.

Who checks the door? Who talks to the person who looks for the Trap?

And then in combat, the Tactical um options are just great. It's like I'll put my tanks up front, I'll put my range DPS in the back um, I have crowd control characters who would be wiped if they tried to solo through this dungeon. But they're awesome. In a party, those kind of things really, really help, especially if it's turn-based. I find that tactical making tactical choices in turnbas is just kind of elevated, but that's, of course, just a taste thing. Now, as much as I love the fact that you have that versatility — because you have all these characters in your party — for choosing who does dialogue, who does traps, how you're doing a fight, it raises a lot of questions about how to handle certain things. Stealth is a good example, if your party is stealthing, how does that work? Because if everybody can trigger the guards perception, then you're Never As Good stealthing As the least stealthy person in your party, which then leads to issues of like: well, maybe you can break the party up and send the thief ahead. And then you have to talk about like: how far can you separate parties?

Can they go a screen apart? Can they go out of sight from each other? Can they go on different map instances?

That's a nightmare of design work, just to answer that question of how does stealth work, and if stealth instead is you pick a party, member and it's testing against their best stealth, then it makes it easy. You just, you know, take the character has got high stealth skills, give them all the stealth items and now you're part is not seen. Just so you know. That's how solo play tends to work. It tends to look, for you and not your companions. But it's a little more complex, if you made a whole party and none of them are you making stealth be reference to one particular character.

How do you even show that? How do you show that in the UI that this is the character that matters? This also is true for reputation, if your party enters an area and one of the characters kills an NPC, most games just treat it like well, the entire party's reputation is tanked. You don't have a individual character reputation, you have a party reputation, which makes it strange, especially if your party can have something in it like a paladin and an assassin.

That's why in Temple we didn't allow that combination by doing alignment partitioning. But it raises a lot of questions if you're going to have a party control, and these are questions you're going to have to answer, as a designer and they're going to have to make sense to the player base. I also think party design is easier in the sense of it's very easy to make. In one sense, it's easier to make encounters and boss fights because, since the whole party needs to wipe for it to be a game, be a wipe for it to be a game, over your boss encounters are likely to be easier to get balanced because you know well they're going to have five characters in here, six characters in here. He can be a little tougher because it doesn't matter if three of them get knocked down. They can still win with the other two. However, and also I'll throw in um — it also makes it easier if your game has class or skill restricted items, like if you have: here's a sword that only thieves can use, or here's armor. That requires an armor skill of at least 70 to wear because you have a lot of people in your party, you can usually — and - and you're you made them and you control them — it's usually easier for you to move those restricted items around and be able to use it where, if it was a Solo character play, you're playing a wizard like, well, I guess I won't use that sword or that armor.

So it just ends up with more junk items to cart back and sell. However, I talked about testability when I was talking about single player. It is very hard to test group controlled RPGs and the reason for that is there may be unwinable party combinations. In fact it's really likely there are, but it's hard to find them. The more class race you know, character Choice Point combinations there are, it's exponential, and if it's, you think it was.

Bad in single player. Once you add five players. You've just added plus five to that calculation of which is exponential in all the different combinations you're going to have to test.

Good luck with that, when I did Temple, which was my, you made a whole party and controlled the whole party. I spent a good amount of time looking for unwinable combinations. The toughest party I played was an all halfling, allb party and that was tough because there's only so many things you can do with bars and it was a tough thing to play. I did manage to finish the game with it but it was much harder than other parties I made and the best parties were the ones that were a good mix. All something parties, all wizard parties, all Thief parties are just inherently hard. But you have to test all those combinations and that is going to be something that's more difficult to do. So I think a lot of this can be summed up as you, as the designer, should do the one that your taste drives you towards, but understand that the solo one is limiting in player option and the party based one is going to require a lot more work from you, design — wise.

There's a lot more things you're going to have to test There's a lot more things you're going to have to think about, you know, like the stealth and reputation issues I talked about. You're going to have to decide those and you're making this choice. So, again, I don't like it when people go. I want to do this and I'm going to ignore the consequences of my design decisions. If you choose to do this in your game, accept these design decisions as ones you're going to have to make.

Personally. That's why I like solo one, ultimately, it comes down to who's the player. Is that character right there the one they made?

That's, in general, why I like it. Yes, it comes with a lot of work already solved for you in terms of who gets seen for stealth and whose reputation's affected. But I also. The main reason I like it is it makes a connection between the player and the character. So, Tom FS, I hope this answered your question, and I know a lot of other people have asked this question too. So there's your answer.
