+++
title = "Arcanum Combat: Real Time vs Turn Based"
date = "2023-07-13"
id = "-QUDeipApgU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Combat Design"]
summary = "I talk about Arcanum's combat modes, my intention for them, and what I would change now."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about arcanums, various combat modes, the real time, turn-based and fast turn based, kind of what the ideas were behind that, why it's even in the game, um, what I wish

I had done differently. So go back to 1998. We had originally specced out Arcanum before we talked to Sierra.

Um. We had a rough outline of what we wanted to do and we were planning to make it turn based. We wanted to do turn based. We coming off Fallout, we understood turn based, turn-based RPGs have something that I really like, which is, as I've said in another video, when I cast a spell, especially a spell that has an area of effect, and especially in an isometric game, when things are moving around while I'm casting it, that drives me insane. I mean I liked Baldur's Gate, but that it drove me insane to try to cast like a fireball in that spell.

Sometimes the people I was trying to hit would move out. Sometimes one of my companions would move in. By the time I clicked in the spell, I cast it and went off and blew up. Who knows what was being. Who's going to be hit didn't like that.

However, when we got into deep talks with Sierra, they really insisted on multiplayer, and at the time, their argument was: they didn't think that single player RPGs without a multiplayer component would sell very well, and you know. So that meant that we had to do real time, and what they really wanted was just to make the whole game Real Time now, if I had had my way, which I did not, I would have suggested dropping multiplayer and real time and just doing Turn base and balancing for that. So, because I didn't get my way, what should have happened and it didn't, and I point this out because, uh, some people are, even though I talk about, like watching my stories with nuance and understanding that I'm not always the good guy or I'm not always making the right decisions, even if I'm trying to be the good guy. Um, what I should have done here is drop to turn based and just made the whole game Real Time and balanced for that and made the spells for that and just gone that way. I mean, there was an ample exam number of examples of games I could have used as a template for how to do real time combat. In fact, when I really got into EverQuest, one of the things I loved about it was that concentration skill, because every time you got hit you rolled against the concentration skill to see if you kept casting, which added a depth to uh spellcasters, because you not only had to be smart, so you had all your and have your spells, and you know you wanted all these other skills and stats, but you really wanted concentration too, so you wouldn't get interrupted when you were cast. In any case, what happened was we decided to keep both and I thought I could do it, and I was wrong. What ended up?

Shipping was unbalanced for both real time and turn based. We tried to balance them through your, the same place. We calculated action points for turn base. We calculated how fast you should be, um, doing your animations and attacks in real time. We thought that would balance. It did not.

Um. We added the fast turn-based mode because I was trying to convince Sierra: hey, turn base can be pretty topping, it can go pretty well, because fast turn base basically skipped the animations. Um on someone's turn, so if you click somewhere, it didn't bother to show you walking, or I don't even think it showed combat animations, it just boom, calculated your turn, a number would fly off and it would continue um. Now what's interesting is I had a lot more ideas on what to do with turn base, but, by the time we got the basic stuff implemented in real time and all the other features in the game which I've said in other videos, I really should have edited some of them out. I know people like newspapers and they liked a lot of other features in the game. We just had too many features in that game. We couldn't get them all coded, debugged and balanced in a reasonable amount of time with a dozen people working on the game, so some things should have been cut.

However, saying that, there were a lot more ideas I have for turn base that I wish I had explored, I already said in a previous video that one of the things I taught I thought about for turn based was just making, whenever enemies had consecutive turns, just collapsing them and they all go once on that turn and, even more than that, just giving one initiative role to All Enemies. So if it was just you fighting, you'd go, and then all the enemies would go, and then you'd go and all the enemies would go. If you had a party, you'd move someone in your party, maybe someone else in your party, then all the monsters would go, and then a couple more people in your party would go. What's cool about that is I talked about when I did some experience with that later it the pros and cons of letting enemies go. In one turn, seem to balance out kind of wish I'd done that. Um, some other turn-based ideas I had was to separate movement and Combat Action points and do separate pools. Um, so the way that would work is you roll your initiative and then in initiative order, everybody moves, so they do, they decide where they want to be on the board. Then in initiative order again, everybody gets to do non-movement stuff. They can drink a potion, they can throw a spell, they can do an attack. That's interesting.

Um, some of the ideas I had to make alternatives for that um, because I've played around with it in my little toys — is you move in your initiative order and then the action is in Reverse initiative order, meaning the first person to move, the last person to get his combat attack. And that had interesting things because basically you know the fast people would move quickly but then the slow people would move and then immediately get to attack. So that led to some interesting things where if you had saw a melee guy come at you and your range guy, you could step away, do your ranged attack and then the melee guy wasn't next to you to attack. So it gave advantages to wanting to go first and disadvantages to when you go first. That was interesting.

Um, another one was completely separate initiative roles for the move in action points. So what would happen is everybody wrote initiative and move. Then everybody would roll initiative again and do their action points. I really like this one because any bonuses you had to that initiative role worked in both of them but weren't guaranteed. So maybe you'd move early in a in them during the move phase but then the action phase. You roll badly and you attack near the end.

Now, if you have a really good bonus, chances are you're going to move early and attack early, but it's not guaranteed and I like that, that sense of um, not gambling but Randomness that was thrown in there because it basically meant your bonuses were just that they were good but they didn't guarantee anything. The lowest agility, slowest, you know character in the entire uh, set of party members and enemies might roll really well and move first and then might roll really well again and attack first. It was not common but it might happen. It the same reason. I like criticals, I like the fact that, um, a battle can be going really badly and then you suddenly get a critical success and it turns it similarly occasionally a battle can grow really well and you're getting a little. Arrogant about it and then you critically fail and your weapon explodes or something.

I love that, so it's funny. I have a point on this. I was. I did this to answer someone's question about why we even had real time in Arcanum and it's because of multiplayer — and why we ended up with real time and turn based. That was my bad decision, but my point here at the end is I don't think turn-based RPGs have been completely mined — not even close to being completely mined on fun engaging mechanics that you could do for turn-based. I think there was just a quick rush into making RPGs real time and then when some people went like whoa, you know, I don't necessarily want real time — they introduce Real Time with pause, which for me didn't address any of the problems I have with real time, which isn't that people. Are moving around. It's that I can't do area of effect spells when people are moving around.

Um, I think that there's a whole bunch of turn-based variations that could be explored. I I kind of hope they are. I wouldn't be surprised if they are being explored in the Indie space. The Indie space is so huge I can't even keep up anymore with what's going on. I mean, if you know of any, um, RP, turn-based RPGs that have some really unusual turn-based comment, uh, combat mechanics, let me know in the comments. I would like to check them out. I just really like the, space of turn base, and I'm always imagining what could be done there and I just feel like it's a, it's just a part of RPGs that feel like, especially as we went first person, they're just being left behind and we're not going to see anymore, and I think that's unfortunate because I think there's a lot of cool stuff there. Anyway, hope that answered the Arcanum question. Hope that gave you things to chew on for turn-based combat.
