+++
title = "Prioritizing Tasks"
date = "2025-09-10"
id = "0ZO-YYziKV0"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Management"]
summary = "I talk about how (and why) to prioritize tasks during game development."
references = ["8Kc1XoHpHEA", "nnH4XJBHvFQ", "2yiZHvXsXnw", "gMiQ9_MzM6Q", "Ooe44v7j-bo"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about prioritizing tasks.

What do I mean by this? Doesn't matter, I think, whether you're in a big, you know hundred thousand person team, you're in a small team or even if you're doing solo dev, you have to prioritize the work tasks to get a game done — And I realize I've never really talked about this, Um it. Some of it is, I always thought, kind of self-evident, but there is some minutia that's kind of interesting and some stuff I've learned after a long time. So I thought I'd talk about prioritizing tasks And one of the first questions is: why do I have to do that? Just get it all done, because you will not get it all done.

Every game is shipped without things done. In fact, the best advice I ever got from uh, Jay Patel, who is the tech director at Interplay, was: no game is ever finished, It's only shipped. And it took me years to realize you literally will not. Finish everything on your task list. You never will.

The task list is infinite, It, if you try to do everything, you keep adding things to it, you keep noticing things, there'll be little bugs, you think of new features, you want to change a whole bunch of things. It will never end And you don't have enough time to do that. Time is not infinite And if you've watched my videos, you know I'm going to say: and money isn't infinite. So you, don't have enough, you don't have infinite time, You don't have infinite money. So you do have to prioritize tasks.

Let's just put that as a we or put a pin in that and go. We all agree on that, but before I talk about the tasks themselves, I kind of want to divide the tasks into features and bugs, because you, I kind of handle those differently. For features, Those are the things you're putting in the game, things you plan, things that are in the design doc which you made right, I always make sure we do the foundational stuff first. And this may be obvious, but you will be surprised at how many people want to immediately dive in on non-foundational stuff. And you've heard the expression: you got to walk before you run. Yes, literally, your animators should do a walk animation before they do the run animation, or specifically, do the movement animations before they do any of the combat animations. You know, because some games are like you, just always run So great, do the run animation, but don't start, you know, swinging swords and blocking with shields and shooting guns before you have a single walk animation in. So that's what I mean by foundational. And this can be in other things as well.

Like you, shouldn't do the bartering or the pickpocket systems unless you have inventory done, because what are you buying and selling from, what are you stealing from? And this may seem obvious, but let me just tell you that I think every game I've ever worked on there's been someone so excited about doing something and they want to get started on immediately and it is utterly and completely nonfoundational and you have to explain to them. You literally can't do this because all the underlying systems you want to call don't exist.

So foundation first, then I tend to prioritize on how important the feature is to the setting in the story because, remember, you did setting, then you did story, then you started making your mechanics. If these mechanics are not important to the story, they have lower priority. So if you've written, made a setting and you've made a story and it turns out, stealing items from NPCs isn't critical to the setting or the story you're trying to tell, you don't need to have it. But you know if having merchants is critical. If it's, you know your entire item economy is based on the idea that you can buy and sell from merchants at some point. You better prioritize that higher, then you have to look at effort.

I know some people like to. After they prioritize things by importance within the same categories of importance, they do the lower effort stuff first. I can go either way on this. I I know sometimes it's easier to knock down what people call the lowhanging fruit because it's easy and you can get it in quickly and I agree with That's a good reason to do it. But sometimes the stuff that takes a little more effort is good to do first.

Like you're, really excited, You're. Into doing this. There's some ideas you really want to make sure get done right. So you do the high effort stuff first. Then, when you're tired — you've been working on this game for, you know, a year — maybe some of the lower effort stuff you can just knock out because it you it will give you the impression of you're getting a lot of stuff done, because these are the tasks that are easier to do.

I I understand both arguments. I've done it both ways. Both have worked well. Both have caused some issues, so I'm not sure how much to put effort into the prioritization formula. But — and by effort I mean time estimation, which we'll talk about — but then you have to incorporate passion, and I mentioned that.

You know there are people who got on your project because there was something very interesting to them. What I found is, if it's not something you can prioritize as an early task, make sure the person who wants to work on it knows they're going to own it. Meaning you know, let's say, somebody's really into how stealing is going to work. You can tell them you're going to be in charge of that. But first we're making inventory, and if they're not making inventory when the schedule's made, let them know. Inventory looks like it's going to go around September. So in October I want you to knock out pickpocketing.

Great. The reason I like to do that is I find that assigning people where their passion is results in a much better game. And I still remember an argument I got into with a, VP of development, who said: "We can't always have people working on what they like. What kind of games would we make if we only let people work on? What they liked", and I'm like "Better games". But it's a weird argument to have that you should assign task to the people most passionate to work on it. But I think that's an important way of prioritizing tasks, which is if they have the ability to do it, if it's in their skill set, why not let them do it?

That's what they're excited about, and then they own it. And especially if you tell them you own it now, which means QA can know this is the owner. And so when they find bugs in this, they go straight to that person and go. I tried to steal from a, an orphan, and it crashed the desktop. Oh no, I forgot about people with null inventories, because orphans are penniless.

I'm making that up, but that's kind of thing about. Part of prioritizing features for me is knowing what people want to do and trying to factor that in to the, effort and other factors that are going into prioritizing the feature. But now let's talk about bugs, because I think I I put in bugs. Oh, my good, I spent all that time just talking about features. I do bugs differently than I do features when I'm prioritizing tasks. Because you will never get all the bugs fixed. I've never seen a game ship that is flawless.

If you don't believe me, I've got a whole video called bugs and RPGs. If you disagree with me, can you leave it in that video and we won't clutter this one up on um prioritizing tasks. But I just don't believe you will ever fix every bug, especially in a sufficiently complex game, especially one like an RPG. It's kind of like that math thing: If any sufficiently complex mathematical system can't prove all the postulates that are in that system, that's probably unrelated. But knowing that you can't fix all the bugs, that's why you have to prioritize them. And in my games I prioritize crashes — Although some of you may go — it doesn't look like that from me playing your games — But I do prioritize crashes because no one wants to crash a desktop and lose all their progress. But I also prioritize — equally well or equal priority with crashes — progression blockers. And progression blockers are anything you can do in the game that prevent you from finishing the game. It could be anything from you made a, character build that literally can't finish the game. Maybe they can't do the any of the boss combats at the end because they're just not strong enough to do it.

Or it could be something I've talked about: a quest item that got destroyed in a game I was. Playing and therefore I couldn't turn it in and because that quest was a main story quest, I couldn't finish the game story. It's even worse if the game doesn't detect it, because you might go on for hours before you realize, oh no, I can't finish this game. But even if it detects it, like the moment the item gets destroyed, it — it fails that main story quest. You can't finish the game. That main story quest is uncompletable now.

So those are prioritized the highest for me. I've talked about balance. I don't really prioritize balance that high, probably to the detriment of some of my games.

Um, I think I have a video on that. But some games do prioritize balance a lot And if you're multiplayer, I think that's supremely important. If you have player versus player combat or even if there's multiplayer and they all pick different classes and they're you know, going through some game together. If they're wildly imbalanced, if it's PvP, it's unfair. And if it's PvE but some classes are just way better than others, people are going to feel awful when they play the, weak class, or no one plays it, and therefore it's hard to get a good party together because no one wants to be the cleric.

So I think balance is important in that situation. I also want to point out, when you're prioritizing bugs, that sometimes bugs can become features. And I have a whole video on that. And, what's interesting, the one I remember the most I always think of when I think of this is when we were doing Fallout. I did the barter UI And then, when I was doing Pickpocket, I thought, ah, just leverage barter, I'll pass in a flag, It'll know you're pickpocketing, It won't spend any money and it.

Will check your, steel skill to see if you were successful. The problem is, barter went both ways and I never checked that. So QA discovered that they can not only steal things out of people's inventory, but they could put things back. And when that got reported, I used to meet with the lead QA guy every week And I said, "Oh, I'll take that out". He said, "No, please don't take that out.

We all love it, We love it". And I'm like "But? But he goes"Well, sometimes we plant like we light dynamite and plant it on people". And I'm like, "Uh, that was not the intent". He goes, "But it is so fun". So he left it in A bug, literally became a feature. So you also have to be in that mindset of don't look at every bug as something you have to fix, because I I just told you won't fix all of them, but sometimes you shouldn't fix all of them. Um, now let's talk real fast about who prioritizes bugs.

And I think it's a bunch of different people. First of all, anyone on the team can suggest features and bug to implement and bugs to fix, because I think that should come from anywhere. But I don't think anyone on the team, no one on the team, should just be responsible for oh, and this is highest priority, so I will get on it right away. No, I think it starts with the game director, because you know he or she is supposed to be the one who has the vision of the game. So if the task doesn't fit the vision, you don't have to do it. So zero priority, No one even has to think about it.

But then the leads get. Involved. I think at after that stage, if the game director is like "Oh, this is something I want or something that needs to be fixed, then yes, the leads need to get involved because they're the ones that will be able to figure out the best work estimate, how much, what the time estimates are to complete that task. And I have a whole video on time estimates. They'll also be able to figure out who will do it, which of course may have changed the time estimate but also the scheduling, because who knows when that person is going to be available.

And I have a whole video on delegation and why that's important. But of all the lead, the leads doing this. They're taking the task that the game director or bugs that the game director is like "Yeah, these have to be done" And they're putting estimates and assigning them. To people. I want to call out the lead QA again as being especially important in this phase, because the head of QA will be the one who can tell you this particular bug.

It feels really bad, like, when it happens. It feels bad, It feels awful when this happens. Maybe it's the um destroy, accidentally, destroying a quest item and having to reload and possibly lose hours of your game. If that's easy to fix, you should probably fix it right away, Not because it happened frequently, not because it was super easy to fix, but because it feels really awful when it happens. And, by the way, that's something else that QA can tell you is: how often is this happening? Like? Is everybody in QA running into this, or is it one or two? When we had the random crash, the desktop bug that kept Fallout from shipping, everybody in QA was seeing it.

Some of them couldn't play for more than a minute or two without running into it. None of them played for more than 30 minutes. Weirdly, I could play the game for hours and never see it. And when we discovered what it was, which is the outline outlining characters, had a bug, but only when they were at the bottom of the screen. That's when I discovered — well, I, the way. I tended to scroll everybody onto the screen.

So that never happened to me, and then, finally, a very important person in the whole who handles the prioritizing of task stuff is the producer, is the one who producer. The producer is the one who keeps the schedule. The producer is the one who should know at any time in during your game who is going to be working on what when.

And so that's the person who can go here. Are the choke points, if we don't do this early, these people over here can't get their stuff done. That's like you can't do pickpocket until inventory is done.

But they also know, in addition to the time estimates that are coming from the lead, they know the time remaining. So if a time estimate comes in for somebody saying they need a year to get all their stuff done and we have 6 months left, that's where pri priority is really important, because the producer should be at that meeting going: uh, that person you just assigned 12 months of task to, we ship in 6 months. So that person, that producer, has to be there in the meeting.

So there's my overview on prioritizing tasks. You have why you should do it, why you should treat features and bugs differently and how you prioritize, and then who gets involved in the prioritization. Any more details on this, I think, really depend on your game, your scope of your game, the size of your team, the size of your budget. But I think, in general, what I just described works for any size team, any size budget, any scope game. And I hope it helps.
