+++
title = "Thoughts On A Temple Remake"
date = "2024-01-09"
id = "1BBniBe_wRA"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Temple of Elemental Evil", "Game Design", "IP"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about my thoughts on a temple remake, a remake of Temple of Elemental Evil, with things I would like to do that either I ran out of time to do or wish"
references = ["pgn2sQ4vAkU", "hUrNahAr5ho"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about my thoughts on a temple remake, a remake of Temple of Elemental Evil, with things I would like to do that either I ran out of time to do or wish

I had done differently. Um, I've already talked about my thoughts on a Fallout remake — that was months ago and an Arcanum remake yesterday, so I thought I'd do a temple remake. I'll link those other remakes below. I'm not going to do a remake video for vampire Bloodlines, though it's not really mine to remake thoughts from the about. A remake on that should come from Leonard bski or Jason Anderson. So I'm just GNA complete my Trio of remake Thoughts with temple today. So let's get started. I the first thing I'd do just the standard.

I'd fix all the bugs that are in um Temple, and there's a lot of them, I believe we got a big chunk of them in the first couple patches, but we had a third patch ready to go. Out. Had we had a third patch ready to go out? Um, that basically we were told we weren't allowed to release.

So some of those May made it into moders, remakes, I'm sure I don't know, but some other things that I always really wanted to do. Um with temple, I'd want it to run in a higher resolution. I think it's a beautiful game and the characters are 3D. It'd be really nice to get it running in a higher resolution and show off some of those beautiful maps. And I would make the UI fit at the higher resolution, because that UI was in pieces.

It' be easy to push it to the bottom and out to the corners. One thing I would definitely think about doing with the UI, though not as many people were a fan of the radio menu and I think a big problem there was. You couldn't.

Hotkey things, and that's what I'd want to do, like if you ever played a wizard in Temple and you, know, by the time you get up to like level seven or eight, you're getting a lot of magic missiles and you're using them a lot and I wish I could just hotkey magic Missile. So when was my mage's turn? I could just go boink magic Missile, so I'd probably add hot keys. I'm not sure how I would fit that in, um, but I do it the one thing I always wished when we made it, because the idea for the vignettes came late. I know I talked about why in another video. I talked about why I put in party alignment and that was to basically put in some way for the player to say: this is the general alignment of the party, so all the classes have to fit. This and it's why you don't get an assassin and a paladin in the same party.

The vignettes grew out of the idea of party alignment that I'm like. Well, if we have nine different party alignments, we should have nine different ways of starting, and I love those. I love that you know like the lawful one was you're being told to go. I love that the C neutral one was you just find a map in a dungeon and those are super fun.

But they were all really, really short. I mean, some of them were just a few minutes long. I think the longest one might have been 15 minutes and that was just because we were massively, pressed for time.

Party alignment V based vignettes were not part of the original design. And if I had stuck to my guns — well, I shouldn't say that. If I had stuck to my ideals I wouldn't have done them, but once I had the idea I just really wanted to get them in. So what I would do is I would redo those vignettes now. I'd make them longer, more in depth, much more in tune with the idea of a party alignment. So the chaotic neutral W: be very chaotic neutral, you know. The lawful evil one: be very lawful evil, that kind of thing.

I'd also put multiple Solutions in them. Many of them were just nothing but dialogue or nothing but combat and I kind of want to put different things in there. But you know, when only a few minutes long, you really can't have multiple path for a bigger vignette, like take the chaotic neutral one, I'd make an entire dungeon adventure where you learn about this dungeon, you prepare for it, you go in, you maybe it's got multiple levels to it.

You. Get your way out of the way to the bottom, you fight the big dungeon boss and, boom, that boss drops the map to Hamlet and talks about the temple, or maybe it just talked about the mo house, but in any case, that's how I would do that one. Speaking of it more in depth, I would definitely want to revisit the story line for temple. I'd want to make it much more in depth, with foreshadowing of things to come, with a lot more options to do the different quests, more quests, um, especially in the temple, regarding the four subtles of earth, air, water and fire. They were very political, they interacted a lot or they was implied interaction in the written module.

I'd want to have that in the game. Now, improving the storyline and adding such, you know, foreshadowing about the, temple itself would require a lot of better written. Dialogue than I could do, so if I were to do this remake, I'd have to get very good narrative designers on board to read the original module, talk to me about what my intent was in translating it into the game and then have them write really good dialogue, something worthy of the game.

Um, some things that like stuck out as, like Bernie um, Bernie, the magic user and the uh fighter who had the tower right outside of Hamlet. I wanted way more interaction with them, way more. Maybe they even send you out on their own Quest. I mean, they're pretty high level and they have their own stuff going on. So, in a way of putting in a lot more content, that is an obvious way to do it. So you go to Hamlet — basically you can do some quests there, and I'd make that place more. Interesting — but the Druid there should have a lot more quest to give you. The Temple of Cuthbert there, St cubert should have a lot more quest to give you, and that Tower and the Bernie — and can I remember his other name, Bernie, and the other guy.

So, speaking of content, though, I would definitely restore all the no content that got taken out, and there was a lot. Um, there was an entire brothel and it had a bunch of quests associated with it, and all that got cut. I put all that back in, but in addition to that, like I implied, with all the additional Quest hooks that were possible in homelet, I'd want to make a bunch of new maps and have quests that lead to them. You know other dungeons, not as big as the temple, but other dungeons you could go to. Um, maybe you hear about some magic.

Items that would help you, at uh, doing the temple. Maybe you just get treasure maps to other things. Maybe they, the big highle people in Hamlet, have places they want to send you. So I want to do all of that, basically make it a much more realized area, so when you go to the world map, there's a bunch more places you can go. Speaking of the world map, I'd want a bunch more Random Encounters on that and Random Encounters that make a lot more use of our models, like we had, I think we made a c giant crayfish model to use in the boat house and it was used in one Riverside encounter. You know, make, a dungeon, make a cave and put, them in There's a lot of other models we didn't use much.

Um, there's a, you know, a bayor down There's. You know a bunch of Elementals. There's just a bunch of creatures that only got used a limited number of time that if we added more map locations and not more Random Encounters, we could make more use of them.

Speaking of which, I would increase the level cap on Temple. Now, there was a really good reason we didn't do this in the base game and it wasn't just because the module was up only took people up to about Level 10. The reason I'd want to increase the level cap, probably to 20, is, once you do that, there's two things that happen in D and D one. A bunch more spells and abilities become usable and it's really dominated by the additional spells: lot more wizard spells, lot more cleric and Druid spells — just so many, um, and those would all to be coded and put in the game could be.

Done. The engine is easily extendable and some of it's just data, but a lot of it would require specific code and art to support. So it's not a tiny amount of work to up the level cap. Also, once you get the level cap up that High — I mean we supported, uh uh, multiclassing. I would love the idea of prestige classes and throw that in there. That might be too much for a remake, but I would love to pursue that idea and see just how much work it would be to do it, basically make this a true DND d 3.5, complete game. And then, if I've done all the other things — so it's still focused on the temple, so all those other locations and quest lines are side quests, ancillary things that help build you up to do it — then I'd make sure that the four Elemental planes that are in there are a lot bigger, have a lot richer content, maybe their own quests on those ples and um, the bottom of the temple where zmo is. I would like to have that done out a lot better. And since we have already um, that Lo can appear and there's a God that shows up to mess with, uh, St cubert, I'd put all those in a much more complete way. I realize this is probably taking this game name up to being 40, 50 or 60 hours. I don't care, it's a remake. I get to wish for things, but in general I think that's my complete list. So think I think that's my complete list.

So, fix bugs, higher resolution, better UI, better, longer vignettes, storyline, dialogue restored, no, no content and a lot of new content and up the level cap. That's a lot. I don't think it changes the fundamental nature of Temple, but it certainly makes it a lot deeper, richer and more complete, which is what I would have loved to have shipped the first time, but that was not going to happen on that budget and in that um schedule anyway. That's what I would love to do if I was remaking Temple of Elemental Evil today.
