+++
title = "Troika's Might & Magic 10 Design"
date = "2023-05-06"
id = "2ig9tS5Fsx4"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Troika Games", "Publishing"]
summary = "Hi. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about troika's proposal from might Magic 10.."
references = []
+++

Hi. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about troika's proposal from might Magic 10..

I'll be honest, I've forgotten we had done this, but recently I did an interview with RAF colantonio and Peter salnikov on their YouTube channel, House of the dev — I'll put a link in the description — and Ralph said that he always felt bad that Arcane was pitted up against Troika for might Magic 10.. You know, and I told him — I don't even know if I knew that, but I told him, I mean, Publishers do that all the time. They like you know developers to compete for things. And I told him not to worry about it. We didn't get it, but I went on to work on vampire anyway. This occurred right after Temple shipped.

Uh, cricket got approached and said: hey, if you're interested in doing my magic 10, we're soliciting proposals. And I had played. I had played a few of the might Magics.

Um. In fact I played my magic six the most. That was an interesting one. I've, just from the fact that they mixed science and Magic just made me go. Hmm, that's interesting. I know that's a Hallmark of right magic. In fact, one thing I did when I was told to make the proposal is I went through my Magics, one through nine, to try to pull out common features in all of them, because I'm like, if you're a big fan of my magic, you're going to expect certain things. And it might Magic 10, and I found my list. I like I said I keep everything, so I found my notes for making my magic 10.. I thought all my notes on my Magics one through nine. I found my commonality notes. I found a spell list I made of these spells, or I suppose very much like them occur in most of the mighty Magics. Just all this stuff, so I found themes common to all nine might Magics and those themes were a class-based character system, skill training in addition to ranks — something I loved and used in Arcanum: castles either exploring or building or both circuses that traveled around the map, quest to get audience — Quest that you need to do to get an audience with people, which you don't see. That a lot of other RPGs. Fountains that raise stats, temporarily aging — another thing you don't see. A lot of RPGs, both normal and magical and all the bad effects that that causes, and they love to have hidden doors and switches and traps, and these are just things that I saw in all of them.

So I ended up putting together a proposal. This proposal I put together at the end of 2003 and I think I sent it in January of 2004..

So this is after Temple of element shipped and we had done the few patches. We were allowed to do — something else to talk about in the house of the dev that, um, in case you didn't know, Troika was contract contractually prevented from releasing patches to their games — all three of them — unless the publisher approved, and so once they stopped approving them, we couldn't put out patches, not even unofficial patches. I'm sure people may have helped modders make their patches, but I have no knowledge of this anyway, um, we had finished making those patches for Temple and I wrote a Story summary for my magic 10 and I'll read it to you. It's called might Magic 10, the source of magic. So the party's asked by a local hedge wizard to find out why monsters are suddenly hounding a small village. After some exploration, the party can discover that a suppression artifact in a nearby cemetery is no longer working and that's why there's skeletons and zombies are coming out. Baffled by this, the Hedge wizard sends the party to his mentor in a big city, who, after more quests that he sends the party on, learns that in some areas magic isn't working at all, and in other areas it's working better or worse than before. So the party's Main story Quest now becomes to discover the cause of this problem, which leads them to the source of all magic and from there people who are trying to get this source and control it.

Um, some funny things about this is I, can I read this and I'm like, oh yeah, we're writing this? It's so me, because it has different zones of magic and you know it starts small, it's marked something small and then works you out into the bigger world and explains: why you're doing it. Because you know you were the party that was around when zombies started attacking this Village. Um.

One of the things that surprised me was in the design dock I had color-coded parts of the map for whether magic didn't work at all. It worked less than average at average, as average or better than average, but I color coded in blue, um, yellow, green and red and someone who started going colorblind. I have a progressive colorblindness that could be a whole other video started when I was 20.. By the time I wrote this document, I was in my mid-30s and it was already significant enough that occasionally I show up at work and Sharon, uh, who worked at Target — Sharon showman, it was Jason erinson's wife — would go: uh, your pants and your shirt don't match. I go home at lunch and I change and now I mean I'm in my 50s and it's significant.

Uh, last time I went to an optometrist a few months ago, they gave me the issue Cara color plate test, where you look for the number and the bubbles, and I missed half of them. They're like 40 of these, 47, I missed 23.. So my color reason is bad and for The Outer Worlds, in fact I, the poor UI team. They were great, they were awesome to work with, but I made them make every user interface in grayscale first, just to prove that I could use it. Then they could color it after that. So shapes are important, um, not Hue, but value in the HSV space is important. But here I am writing a document in 2004 that I'm sending off that has color as part of its Main Story related Quest.

Anyway, that amazed. Me, so we sent this off and I'm not sure we ever heard anything back. It just disappeared Into The Ether and it turns out that — uh, I think it was Atari doing this — they were having lots of people send in proposals, so we never heard back.

I ended up working on vampire — uh, making you know — shark head and Man-Bat and several other, and the rest is history. But I do have the proposal. It's about 10- 15 pages. It exists, so do a lot of other proposals. I found it in a design folder filled with design proposals — not things we were asked for, but things we just made and decided to send out and see if there was interest. But that's my magic 10: the 2003- 2004 Troy care proposal.
