+++
title = "Botched Quests And Player Freedom"
date = "2025-03-17"
id = "2yUMsMuq1-w"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Quest Design", "Player Choice"]
summary = "I talk about how allowing players to fail quests (and sometimes reverse that failure) increases the player's agency in their storyline."
references = ["pw6tOlmwwYE"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about botched quests and player Freedom.

This comes from a question from Nick Berg, one who asked: can you share your ideas on botched, failed quests? Don't these limit the freedom of making your own story and RPGs? I actually think it expands your freedom. So I think that's a good question and I want to explain my answer. I think Nick is referring to a video I did on Quest implementation and I will link it below.

Let me give you a quick summary. When I made Arcanum, that's when I came up with the — here are the six states that a quest can pass through. There are five usual ones that go in order, which are unknown, which means you've never heard of the quest, probably doesn't appear in your log, never heard of it mentioned, might be appear in your quest log, but you have, you haven't agreed to do it, you just you've heard it brought up. You know that someone's kidnapped. You know there are.

Bandits in the area, but you haven't agreed to do anything about it. The third state is accepted, you're state. Third state is accepted: you're like: I will go do that. You have told the quest Giver I will do it. I'm on the job, so it goes to the accepted State. Then there's achieved, you've done whatever it is that you said you do. But you haven't turned it in yet. And that's important because sometimes, especially narrative designers want to know the difference between: did you rescue that person, did you kill the Bandit leader, versus did you turn it in? And you're done because the fifth state is completed, you've turned the quest in, you've gotten your reward, you're done.

Now all those can appear differently in the UI for the, quest log. Uh, narrative designers will treat those States differently when people talk to you, but there's always a special six, sixth state that I had called botched. And botched is less of a state. It appears as a state to the player but internally R treated it as a flag, because you can flag any state as botched except for completed, because.

Once you've done it, you're done. Once you, know, rescue that shopkeeper, you don't care if he gets killed later, because you rescued him, you're done. It doesn't affect, it doesn't undo the fact that you rescued him, you're done.

So botched can turn, be turned on and off in any state. So when you turn a, that botch flag on the state becomes botched, but when you turn it off it goes back to whatever state it was in, which means if you are supposed to rescue someone and you've accepted the quest and you're on the process of walking back to town and they die, then your achieved State. Goes to botched and you can't complete it unless you unot it.

And we can talk about that now that qu. That video was more about how to implement those things and you can watch it I will give a lot more detail about those States and how to implement it in the video, but let me tell you why I, why I did botched that way and why I don't call it fail, because botch and unot to me. I was trying to distinguish it from failed, which usually means it's failed, it's done, you can't do anything about it. There were two games in the 9s that annoyed me, by the way They annoyed designer me because, uh, player me, um, I, I really like those games, but the designer part of me was like I would not have done this, I would not do that. That shouldn't be done, first one was Ultima underworld. It let me.

I was trying to turn a quest into an NPC and the way the UI worked is if you clicked on the NPC, if you picked up the item and you hand it in your hand. If you clicked on NPC, you gave it to them. If you clicked just off of an NPC or a chest, it just got th out, thrown out in the world. There was a NPC who wanted to receive an item that was a main story item and I think it was a She was standing in front of a lava field and I clicked and she was animating and I misclicked and it was thrown out in the lava field and destroyed. It was either destroyed or there's no way I could reach it, because touching the lava was instant death. No matter, you was no way to protect yourself from it.

So the item was in unretrievable and that Quest was now uncompletable. But I don't think it went into an uncompletable state, it was just I couldn't finish, couldn't finish, the game had to restart and I had to know I had to restart — and my, by the way, my last save game was a while ago, which I know you should never do, but I was super annoyed and I remember thinking there are better ways that could have been done. And then the second game was B's gate.

The first one, it had a quest to rescue a farmer's kid. Um, and the kid — he said something like my, kid went missing three days ago, please find him. But no matter what you did, you always F found the child dead. They were already dead, but I had a rais dead scroll and I had a cleric in the party who could throw it and that raised dead scroll was a quest reward from something. And I remember thinking I'm going to be super clever, I'm going to raise this kid, couldn't? It was marked invalid Target. I was so angry — because I know the rules of D and D — that, uh, raised dead scroll was good for anyone who was dead up to 9 days and I knew this kid was only head for 3 days. It should have worked. It didn't because the quest designer didn't want it to.

They basically change the rules and this is when I say they are bad games and I've said this before: it's just bad for me. The reason this was bad for me is either the rule was bad or their implementation of the rule was bad, because I — I I knew what the player limitation was and they weren't honoring it that was not good.

So what's? Interesting to me is, since that point, games didn't do what I wanted, which was to allow you to fail at a quest and still somehow succeed. Instead, they just made it so that they're going to prevent you from ever failing a quest. And they did this by, like, marking items as Quest items. And if it's marked as a quest item, you can't drop it and you can't sell it, so you basically the only way to get rid of it is to hand it in to the quest Giver. Usually their Mark is not encumbering you either, so that that way you don't get filled up with Quest items. You can't walk, and then NPCs were often marked as essential, meaning they cannot be killed. They can be injured and maybe, if they go to zero, they fall over for a while and then they stand back up, but they can't be killed.

And that way you know, if you're going to rescue that shopkeeper while he's the on that Quest, why he's your, the person you're escorting. Maybe he's marked as essential and so you can't kill him. So boom, here's the problem I have with that. That severely limits, in my mind, player Freedom. It limits player agency. There's a lot of things that could happen there and the game is going nope.

I've already decided the one way that this ends. You must turn in that Quest item, that one you found. You must bring this person back and who was kidnapped, or you know you cannot raise this child, even though it's only been dead three days, and that scroll says nine days is good, I'm just going to Market it in valid Target.

I saw what I did in Arcane, where, instead of failed, I called it botch, because then you have botch and unot. I saw that as a way to increase the player directed storytelling, because it put a lot more decision — making into the player's hands. What that meant, though, was if the player does something that causes that quest to fail, they get a message, and that's why I thought that botch date was important. You detect that that NPC died, you detect that that Quest, that item, was sold or dropped or destroyed, and you say that Quest is now failed. Now you can't botch a completed Quest, because you're done, but any state before that it gets marked as failed. Now, if you don't have the quest, if the quest is unknown, maybe you don't have to say anything. Maybe you do, maybe you don't, maybe on easy mode you do, and on a more difficult mode you don't, but on all the other ones, if you've heard it mentioned, if you've accepted it, if you, if you've achieved it, so you've got the quest item, or you're you, found the kidnapped person and you're walking back. If the quest gets failed, it should change and give you a message saying that Quest that you have in your log, it's now failed. You can't do it, and sure, the player could always choose to reload. But what I like is it gives the player the additional freedom to keep playing and try to undo the failure. That's why we had unbg in Arcanum. So the way this would work is if you're on an escort Mission and you're coming back with that shopkeeper and that person dies because you get Way laided by Bandits and they happen to shoot him or they do an area of AFF thing and the shopkeeper dies, raise him from the dead.

There's just there, are Scrolls and maybe potions and other things. You can bring them back from the dead. If you're on a dialogue Mission and the person you're supposed to talk to died, either because an NPC killed him or — frequently happened in QA play testing of my games — the player actually killed the person they were supposed to talk to.

Well, guess what? In addition to trying to raise them from the dead — that's why Arcanum had speak with dead — you could kill someone who had Vital Information and you could still get it from them. Sure, you could raise them from the dead. That's option one. Two. You could speak with that and try to convince them to tell you. Anyway, I hope you bought your speech skills right, or maybe there's another way to get it.

Maybe they have a locked safe and the information is in there. But what I liked about that is there's all. Kinds of ways you could continue.

For the quest item being dropped or sold, you can always go back and get it, you know, just if, especially if that item is marked as the, shopkeeper won't flush it out of their inventory for any reason. So if you sell it to a shopkeeper and then you realize you sold your quest item, you have to go back and buy it and he'll probably sell it to you for more money than he bought it from, because he's a shop keeper and he's got to make money. But here's another idea: what if you go find another one? What if they're? They ask you to go get something, and that thing isn't completely unique as long as you, know, bring them back something. Maybe you can make them happy with it. Maybe, finding that other one requ, you can turn it in and with a speech check, you can go.

Come on, man, you just you wanted Joe's Wanda Fireballs. I brought you a Wanda Fireballs that even has more charges. Come on, take it, maybe you can do that. Or maybe you can craft a wand of fireballs. Yeah, what a great way of getting crafting involved in story, involved in quests, as a means of finishing them. And maybe if they said they wanted a Wanda Fireballs, sure you know, you can just craft one and go: here's your W of fireballs. You didn't go get the one They said, I know there's one here.

It's like they didn't care, they just wanted a Wanda Fireballs. But maybe they wanted Joe's Wanda Fireballs because it says Joe on the side or you know, stamped made by Joe. So you forge it, maybe part of crafting or maybe a subscale of crafting is forging, it's making. An item, a document or something that looks like something else. So when you use that crafting skill, part of that skill or the crafting skill or the sub skill — forgery - depending on how often you want to do this — is to make a new one that looks like the one you supposed to get.

So maybe, just maybe, you don't even try to go get that wand that Joe made. You don't feel like dealing with those Bandits. Or maybe maybe there's a pesky dragon in that cave and you're like: you know what?

I'm tired of Dragons, I'm tired of dealing with them. I'm just going to go straight to forging now.

Yeah, it requires you to have a certain amount of skill and it probably requ a certain amount of materials. Maybe Joe's wands are always tipped in silver, so you're like, uh, I got to go get silver, or maybe he tips. Them in or chalum, and you're like I don't have any — or outome, okay, maybe you have to buy it, maybe you have to go find it somewhere else, but maybe hopefully there won't be a dragon guarding it. What I love about this is it gives you an alternative. It gives you a way of doing it. That's fun. It involves exploring, it may involve combat, it may involve dialogue. It's got all the things wrapped up in there. And what is this?

Crafting is now involved as a potential Quest solution. Suddenly, crafting is out there, not just to give you XP or to let you make extra potions which you probably won't never use, but you can use them to complete quests. You can craft the thing the person's asking for rather than go get it. I'm going to argue that botching and unbg Quest, by its very nature of being unot, adds. To player directed story and increases the players agency and freedom in the game they're playing.

So I hope that not only does this answer your question, Nick Berg One. I hope you find it to be a good answer because I wish more games would do this.
