+++
title = "Fast Fail"
date = "2023-11-27"
id = "3kyFVaHPPU8"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Prototype", "Game Development"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about a development methodology called Fast fail."
references = ["IADSh_P05As"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about a development methodology called Fast fail.

Ironically, I used to do fast fail 30 years ago, before I knew what it was called that, and I'm doing it now with my own little fun in-house games. But it hasn't been something done recently and I want to talk about it because I really think fast fail is a good way of making games and maybe if you're thinking about making your prototype, this may help you put it together. So what's called Fast fail these days is something that I usually just call rapid prototyping, and if you watch the video I have on stages that um game development goes through, prototyping is one of the early stages where you quickly put together a level just to see if a mechanic works or just to see if the level size is good or the sight lines are good or whatever you're trying to do. You do it before you have final art and final code to do rapid prototyping, you have to be in the mindset that you view failure as a good thing, that you're not upset when something fails. You're happy that, with as little time and resource investment as possible, you discovered something you were about to do isn't going to work.

That's what I love about rapid prototyping and this fast fail methodology. But it means if you do this, you have to be willing to throw away stuff. If you're a designer, you have to let go of a design mechanic that you think is great. If you're a programmer, you have to be willing to throw away code. If you're an artist, you have to throw away your art.

That's part of fast fail. You do something. It doesn't work. You do something else, and there are some people who just can't do that. I used to think it was an ego thing.

Now I'm beginning to think that some people don't understand that the path to a destination is it straight, that when you're trying to get to an end point, you won't. You won't always walk directly there. Sometimes there are some things you need to go around. Sometimes you end up on what we used to call in uh, AI, uh, local, Maxima. You know which?

It's why hill climbing algorithms get stuck, because you're trying to find a mountain but you're stuck at the top of a local Hill and every, step you take is down, but you know you're not at the Mountaintop yet. This is kind of what rapid prototyping lets you do: with design ideas, code ideas, art ideas. You can put them together really quickly, see if it's going to work.

Now I I mentioned I'm doing that now with the little games I make for fun. That little. Uh, space combat simulator, my 3D dungeon maker, those are just. I had an idea. I wanted to see if it worked, if it hadn't no big loss, if they did great. I have a thing that now sitting in my you know project folder that contains a feasible idea win-win. If you watched my early videos on making Fallout, you're know that rapid prototyping was something I did very, very early on.

There was there were three engines made. Before we picked the isometric one, there was a, voxal engine and a 3D engine and they were dumped because the voxal one was too limited and the 3D engine one was too slow and too low poly for the frame rates I wanted to get. It would have been a very low poly game. It just it We wouldn't have been able to use those engines to make the Fallout that we wanted. To make, but if I hadn't made them, we wouldn't have known that the um. We were very — I don't know if it's called agile now — but we were very open to ideas, even if they changed everything. When Leonard had his idea for the changing the Aesthetics of Fallout to what the 50s thought the future would be, we had already made a lot of stuff.

Some of it got thrown out. Um, we threw out some wall sets, um, trying to remember there was a few things. We throughout we kept a lot of things out.

That's why when you play Fallout you see some armor and you're like that looks like it's out of Road Warrior, not a 50s movie. And you're right, there was stuff we liked from other places that we kept, even though they weren't completely in line with the new aesthetic. They didn't, they weren't jarring and they made. Sense that you know, everyone's not going to run around in leather jackets.

Probably the biggest thing that happened, you know, is when we decided we weren't going to go with GS and anymore and we had to make new system mechanics. We had to move fast and we had to test quickly and that happened. I mean, Chris came back to me in a few days with a nearly fully realized system and we threw it in and we hooked it up and we played it. And that's when I I remember I said I wanted to put luck in and um, Brian Fargo was like, hey, I think we need to buy something. There need to be something that's purchasable besides skills.

And we did that, but that was because the game itself we treated as a prototype. We threw the new mechanics in and saw how they worked. I I sometimes look back at Fallout and went, hey, I didn't realize that's what we were doing back then, but we really did the rapid prototyping at the beginning and the end of that game and a little bit in the middle. Sometimes I think about Arcanum and I'm like I think the problem with Arcanum was we prototyped a lot of stuff and then we didn't have time to remove it. So you're playing a lot of systems in that game that are in their raw Alpha State, and that's actually one of the problems s with fast fail. So this go fast to find great methodology doesn't work in some situations and a lot of companies don't do it at all because they've seen failure. This is how it can fail. A lot of bosses and Publishers can't see the ideas being expressed in a prototype because they can't see past the gray boxing. I've worked.

With people who look at a gray box prototype and go this is stupid. You know my favorite, you know unconstructive feedback I've ever gotten. But I've tried to explain to them.

We're not here to look at Art, we're not here to look at, you know, anything but a prototype for a stealth mechanic. So, yeah, we have toost guards sliding around and all the buildings are big gray Cubes, but that's not what we're here to look at. We're here to see if the stealth mechanic makes sense. If it makes sense, there's the guard going around the building on a path and you're trying to sneak into the building and the door is just a hole in the side and there's a vent which is a smaller hole that you have to crouch to get into.

And that's what we're testing. We're testing sight lines and feedback, and does it make sense to? The player sense? Does it make sense to the player who's sneaking through?

This is everything behaving like they would expect. But I've worked with people who just look at it and go: this looks dumb, this is horrible. This mechanic is awful and the mechanic isn't awful.

They just can't see past the gray boxing. By the way, if you work with people like this, you simply cannot show them prototypes and I don't know all way around it. I've worked with too many people who literally cannot see past the gray box. They even if they tell you they will, all their feedback comes back negative. So I don't know how to do that other than wait till you have a beautiful corner or a vertical slice and show them that. Also, I've worked with developers who can't do fast fail either, because they can't bear it apart with their work once. They've coded something, once they've written a design dock for a system mechanic, once they've put together a creature or a prop that goes in the world, they really, really want it to go in the world and they can't bear to part with it I think I mentioned in South Park we threw away whole levels and, yeah, that was. That was painful. I mean completed, finished, playable, shippable levels. It was painful but we did it.

Some devs can't do that they're. Once that happens, they're just they can't bear it. They want to go to another project. They, they're seeing their work thrown away rather than for what it is, which is we put something together, it doesn't work, we're moving on.

Um, another problem with fast fail is with Fallout. I did a lot of it before anybody came on board, so me making engines in either my free. Time or my spare time when my installer maker was running me. Putting together an engine didn't cost much. But once you have a full team, if you're trying to bankroll the fast fail method, you're paying a lot of people to do a lot of work that you may throw away.

That's it's every other industry in the world calls that: research and development, R&D. There isn't a whole lot of R&D in the game industry, at least not in a lot of game companies. Some still do it, but those are companies that have a big enough War ch that they can bankroll it. So I used to tell people like ID and valve and blizzard they can work on a game until it's done. Most companies work on a game until the budget's finished and then it gets shipped. So it's very hard to do fast fail, which has R&D which is very hard to predict. You know, I defy anybody, no matter what how good produc they are and how many years experien as developer they are, to predict how long an R&D phase will last until you get something acceptable. So that's another big problem with fail, fast fail. And then the one last thing that I've actually seen happen is because you're not going in a straight direction towards your destination, there's a possibility that you will wander forever. I call this the convergence problem. It's what I saw happen at carbine. There were a lot of ideas going in for lots of different things, but nothing was converging.

Now I identified that issue as there was no vision. There was no singular Vision.

Too many people had too much say in what was going into the game, so it never converged on one thing. So all the prototyping and redesign in the world isn't going to help because you're not converging on any central idea. You're just wandering through a space of design ideas and you're never, ever going to arrive at one.

So that's what I see as fast fail and some of the dangers. I believe that because a lot of companies don't do fast fail. Now we see a lot of stable games that aren't that good or games that get better after their third or fourth patch, maybe even after a year or two, especially AAA games that ship and are eh, and then they get better and significantly different, you know, a year or two later.

That's obviously a company that didn't fast fail and Rapid prototype. Now fast fail can lead to unstable games because you have changed things out so much. But I also believe that it is the path to Greatness. So sometimes I think companies have to decide. Do they want stable goodness or a little unstable greatness? And personally I like Fast fail, but there were whole decades in my career that I didn't have an opportunity to use it. But if this is something you're thinking about — putting together a prototype — I recommend doing it as quickly as possible and making as much prototypes, as many prototypes as possible, just to see what works, and I think that will result in a better final game for you. Anyway, hope this helps.
