+++
title = "Humor In Video Games"
date = "2023-07-23"
id = "3mfl_jOf-Jw"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about humor in video games, but before I do I want to point out"
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about humor in video games, but before I do I want to point out

this is my last shirt. You've seen every shirt I own, including shirts that were boxed up in the garage for a decade or two or four. This is it. I'm gonna start repeating shirts after this. A thing didn't think it would be a thing, but it was a thing. That thing is over.

I think it's pretty obvious if you've played a lot of my games that I try to put humor in all of them. Some of them are obviously humorous. I mean The Outer Worlds War, tumor on its sleeve. Fallout was always described as a Darkly humorous post-apocalyptic game, but if you look hard, you see my humor in all my games.

For example, in Temple, which was pretty straightforward, pretty. You know, buy the books, the indie game.

The humor comes up in a lot of the characters I wrote. I wrote farrella, Who was the older. Sister who hadn't been married off yet in the village of Hamlet, despite her dowry. If you marry her, wow, does she have things to say about you, about places you take her to. She hates everything and everywhere and everyone. But I also slowed it into vampire and I told you I only worked on it for the last year, so I had nothing to do with, like Deb of the night and some of the radio stuff which was hilarious. My stuff occurred in the bosses that I did. So if you played the shark-headed boss in the frozen fish Warehouse, which was an instance, because I decided he was going to throw fish at you, which meant all those fish in all those shelves had to be physics objects and let's just say that the source engine at the time, running on computers at the time, was very unhappy when you said: I want a hundred physics objects right in the same location. In fact, starting that level, sometimes you can hear little noise as all those physics objects come to a rest on the shelves and of course you know the shark boss would pick them up and throw them at you. But I also did it with the man bat, the final boss, the what the sheriff turned into when he would dive down to pick up objects. I originally just put a bunch of objects down there for him to pick up, but eventually I made a list of things and there were things like cars and signs and trucks, uh. But then I eventually like started having them throw people at you and it was funny to make them iconic people. So he threw police officers and, I think, prostitutes.

Um, they would, so they would still be alive. Too when he threw them. Um, because they would take damage when they hit you and frequently they would die. I believe there was one time I think I would automatically kill them, because otherwise I think there was a point where the police officer would get tossed into you, take damage, shrug it off and stand up and start shooting the Man-Bat, which I thought was funny. But I think we took that out. I think I made it, when they hit you they died.

So what I want to say about humor other than I like to use it a lot. Humor and games is hard to do. A lot of people think it's easy, they're wrong, most games don't try it and most games shouldn't not. Every game needs to be funny, um. It is just a hard technique to put into a game, especially to put into a game in a way that is good for that game's theme.

That's why the humor and Fallout is very different than the humor in The Outer Worlds. It's very different than the human Temple, very different than the human vampire, because those are different games. In that sense humor is also dangerous to put in because there's a lot of different humor you can try and some of it, a lot of it, is wrong for your game, but a lot of it is also stuff that will set off some people who are playing your game. I mean, you don't want to offend anybody, although there were some people who will be offended by almost anything. So humorous is dangerous in that respect. Humorous humor is also dangerous in the sense that what's funny to some people isn't funny to others and they will get upset that they're not getting the joke or you're. Being not funny or it I tried to follow the same rule about humor that way back in Fallout I imposed on making mentions of cultural references and specifically, if it's put in there and the people don't get it, they shouldn't even notice it was there.

So that way they don't feel excluded. And that's really good with humor, because humor is a really easy way for people to feel excluded. They know a joke is being told and they don't get it I know I mentioned in Fallout that one of the perks you could buy was the Slayer and it was if you got your unarmed really high, you could buy this perk. That there was a chance when you punch someone you just had a chance of Killing Them outright. That makes sense. The name Slayer makes sense for that perk. But for people who watch Buffy the Vampire Hunter. They knew we were making a reference and they're like on this layer. Similarly, when we put in the limited edition Red Rider BB gun or the Red Rider BB gun at all, people knew we were making.

Well, we're making a reference to the movie A Christmas Story. If you didn't get that reference, if you didn't get that cultural reference, it was just a BB gun called Red Rider. Okay, that makes whatever, but either Bob, the guy who sold it to you, or he didn't sell it to you — you found it in his trailer, I think either any of this dialogue or in the description of the limited edition Red Rider BB gun. It says something like: be careful, or you shoot your eye out.

Kid. To someone who's seen a Christmas story that's funny. But if you haven't seen Christmas Story, it just sounds like good advice: be careful, because this the whole point of the limited edition is: it does extra damage and it's easier to hit people in the eye. That's what it does, if you've never seen the movie, it's still a good weapon and that's still good advice. If you've seen the movie, it's funny. That's the humor I like doesn't exclude anybody, but if you get it's funny on a different level.

That's not important to experience, but that's not the only reason to put in. Humor is to occasionally have a haha time. I've always said that pacing in games is really important in the sense that it should be fast paced in some times, slow paced in others.

Humor is the same way. It should be funny in some points and then dark and serious in others. And that's because, like everything in life, you want ups and downs, you don't want monotony, you don't want flatness and humor. Helps gains have that up and down. There was something I used to say at carbine a lot when people were like, well, we're having a lot of fun putting in bosses, we should do all bosses. And they'd even point to Shadows of the Colossus and I'm like, but Shadows of Colossus has a lot of downtime between bosses, where you get on your horse and you ride through a Countryside for a long time looking at the landscape, maybe fighting a couple. I guess trash mobs is what they would be called now. So I used to say people would rather ride a roller coaster that goes up and down than a monorail. Doesn't matter how high the monorail is, it's still a monorail humor is like that. Humor provides that pacing. Humor is really good as a relief valve. This was really important in a game like.

Fallout because you would see some horrific stuff. I mean we put in death animations that were horrific — people's limbs being blown off, blood Bones Exposed.

Adding humor to that game lets you laugh. After too much pent-up tension occurred and, as Leonard used to like to remind me, humor makes the dark Parts even darker and I think that's something that's good to remember: that you can't have Darkness without any light. You can't have light areas without dark areas. You need that contrast, whether you're making storyline, dialogue, item descriptions, found lore. Having some humor in a game helps provide release to the player, make the dark parts of the game seem darker in contrast and also makes a game fun, and I'm a big proponent of making a game fun. Like I said, I'm over I'm. I propose making a game fun before making it. Balanced. It's important to me.

The best way I can tell you of distinguishing humor is that the biggest difference I saw between the original Fallout game and the original Wasteland game was the humor. I think there was more humor, there was some humor in way Sun. I think there was more in Fallout. That Delta is a big part of the difference between those games and I think that if you enjoyed those, both of those games — which I think you should — that's a good way of looking at it and going — that's one difference — along many axes of different that we did with Fallout.

That was hard to put in. Dumb dialogue helped a great deal. It's a big part of what makes Arcanum funny is the dumb dialogue. But I don't think you should build an entire game around dumb dialogue and I've never built an entire game just around humor. But I think it's really important. I just want to do a video on it to remind people.

It's hard, kind of dangerous and a lot of people won't get it. So make sure you add humor in a way that doesn't feel exclusionary to your audience, and I think that's everything I have to say. Sorry, this wasn't a funny video. Uh, it's funny. Talking about humor isn't humorous. I think I saw a comedian say that once. It's why comedy schools aren't funny and people go to Comedy schools tend not to end up as good comedians. But anyway, I hope you enjoyed that.
