+++
title = "Evolution Of Design Documentation"
date = "2026-03-30"
id = "3rUsUExrLHw"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design", "Writing"]
summary = "Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about the evolution of design documentation."
references = ["ohHLUKj3NTk", "gmDX1p-WZ7g", "Lm0qhfquv74"]
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about the evolution of design documentation.

This actually comes from a question from Noah Stavish, who asked: "Hey Tim, can you discuss what you expect out of design and technical documentation, both when you write it and when you review what others have written? Can you also touch on how teamwide expectations for documentation has changed over the past 40 years? What problems and solutions have you faced with these expectations?

There are really good questions and I pointed — pointed, Noah — to other videos I've done: Uh, one on just a general how to write design documents. Uh, let's see, there was a writing design specifications in particular, and then game design specification sections, going through all the different sections one by one, of what they should all contain — and I talk about writing them for you know the design in general and doing technical designs for programmers and also designs for artists. So please look at those videos.

They're all valid. I'm not going to do a lot of repeating in this one. I'm going to talk about how things changed over the last 45 years. Let's start in the 80s And what's funny about that is realize most of you weren't even born in the 80s And you got to remember. I started when I was 16., so I was just a sponge. I I didn't know how things were supposed to be. I can just tell you how they were.

At the one company I worked at — tiny little company in Virginia — We had no design doc documents at all. So when I say the evolution of design docs, we're starting from a big zero. Our teams were so tiny. The cable set top games usually made by a couple people maybe, or even maybe three. The uh bridge game that we made, Grand Slam Bridge, which was the biggest game that that Cybron ever made, I think, had five.

People on the team, so the way we organized all of that is we talked the PE, the lead programmer, would tell us what he needed done. I would do it.

The designer, who was basically somebody who knew how to play bridge but didn't know how to code, would tell me what he wanted done and I usually did it. The closest we got to a design doc was he would write down the rules for bidding as a. You know bidding in bridge — which, by the way, I don't play bridge, so I don't know how that works.

He would explain it to me in a flowchart. He knew how to make flowcharts. You know the lines and symbols that mean make a decision here and then go do something. He would draw these out for all the different biddings. There was over hundred, there were hundreds, possibly even 200 of these.

Pages of flowcharts and I converted those into bidding logic. That was as close as we ever got to a design document in the 80s When I reentered the game industry. A few years later, in the 90s, there was a shift away from none to a few.

These could be notes that I took in a meeting, uh, where I'd ask questions and I'd write down notes, which is, you all know, I take a lot of notes. Then I'd go and I'd do code. I actually have and I've looked. I wonder if I've lost it I actually had a design on a restaurant napkin. Tom Decker designed something while we were at lunch for rags to riches: on a restaurant napkin. He drew the user interface, what he wanted said, the condition under two said, and he handed it to me and I went back from lunch and I coded that up. The first and only time I got a design specification on a napkin, but there it is. And then later in the '9s we had very limited documentation And by that I mean you might write a design doc for an area or some notes on what a creature, what you want it to look like, how it's supposed to attack, and, of course, skills and the implementation of those skills.

For Fallout we had all the Gersps books when we started. Steve Jackson sent us a large selection of books, including multiple basic set books. Those got spread out to the team. They looked at them. We played groups so they knew how it worked. In many sense that was our design dock. When we shifted to being spe, to the special system in the last few months of Fallout's development in — and we did that in two weeks — there was no.

Documentation. It was Chris Taylor brought in his homebrew system, He explained it to me verbally, wrote some stuff up on my whiteboard and then I coded. And over two weeks of us talking, me coding and him and a few other people doing a lot of data entry, we switched all the stuff over from gers to special. You also have to remember that for most of the development of Fallout there were only about 12 people.

So what is done now with written documents where, with a lot of meeting, talking or just going to someone's office writing something up on their whiteboard and they use that? They use that to make a creature or do a user interface or write some code. So whiteboards were in everybody's office and they were well used.

Now let's get up to the 2000s. This would be the Troa era For all three of those. Games — Arcanum, Temple of Elemental Evil and Vampire Bloodlines — we did write one large game design document. Primarily we did that because that's what the publisher asked us to do. It was one of the early milestones in the game is provide a GDD. We would do that Later on, while the game was being made. We would write smaller area design documents. We like for vampire we had Santa Monica and Los Angeles and Chinatown and we would fill those in with: these are what creatures are, in there. Here's how roughly how it's laid out. Here's what kind of quests go through here.

But a lot of that was also filled in with the team meeting and talking and again with whiteboards. We, all, had whiteboards in our office and everybody was there and present. And again, this was facilitated, by the fact that the teams were about 15 people — people. People — and then towards the end, grew to about 30, at least the in-house development team — I'm not talking marketing and QA and publishing.

Late 2000s would be when I was at Carbine, because I was at Carbine from 2005 to 2011.. There We actually started using, in addition to docs, we use spreadsheets. I had a system designer who was the master of Excel and a lot of the weapons and combat and economy and itemization and loot tables and all that were done on spreadsheets rather than docs, because you could actually ask questions which he could do a query into Excel and get the answer, and sometimes the answer could be a number or he'd produce a graph. Like I said, he was a wizard. We also kept concept artwork available for people to look at. All three of those docs, spreadsheets, concept art — were shared as needed. We did make some documents.

Primarily, that was to establish a few big things in the game, like: this is what combat's going to be like, These are what the classes are going to be like. And also those were requirements to send back to South Korea to our parent company, NCOFT. It was a bigger team, It was over 80 people — In fact, I think we broke a hundred before I left and I think when the final shipping was closer to 200, but they tended to be broken into smaller groups: strike teams, area teams.

I've mentioned on more than one occasion that the arts department was siloed. So, again, the communication was manageable because you tended to work in a group. Yes, there were some big docs and spreadsheets that did big picture stuff, but in general, there was still a lot of getting together, putting your heads together and talking about stuff In the 2010s up. Through now, because I started Obsidian in 2011, and it's now 2026, so I've been there 15 years: five as a contractor, 10 as an employee. Obsidian moved away from those big monumental GDDs and spreadsheets into Confluence. Confluence is better in every way.

Um, we still do a highle GDD as an actual document, usually describing the setting, the tone, the art style, with pictures and design pillars again if publishers wanted to see them. But we also did it for the other games, just because it provided a nice grounding. But we moved things into Confluence. Confluence just had so many advantages over a word document. One big one was we could create all these subpages and those subpages could have their goals and terms that linked back to other pages, either the previous GDD or to other related pages. So combat might point over to weapon pages and weapon. Would point to concept art pages, so that you could follow that around.

And none of the pages were too long — Uh, they usually. If they didn't fit on a screen, it was usually one or two screen scroll folds because there was a lot of links to going to other, to other things. For example, the highlevel for The Outer Worlds may have mentioned that we're going to make combat and that we wanted combat to be easy for casual players and um players that are more experienced. So the combat page may describe all the different things we're doing, referencing that goal back in the GDD page about what we want to get out of combat. And then it would describe at the very high level how combat was going to work and what those combat goals were. Those combat goals might be things like: we're going to have range combat or melee combat and we want them to be equivalent but different. We're going to have a large variety of weapons and armor.

All those pointed to their own pages with their own goals linked to this combat page and possibly even to each other. What was cool about that was it made it very easy for the person to was looking at melee to go and follow those links to all the other things. What, where were the melee weapons going to be? Why is melee working this way? You could just follow those links and Confluence made it really easy to do th, to follow those links and understand why was melee designed to not require a two-hit roll, because it's different than ranged, which does, which was one of the goals of combat, and so that made it really easy. But also, what I loved about Confluence the most was you people could be set as page watchers and what would happen is, if any change was ever made to a page, they would be informed. And what was great about that is, yes, you, they were probably in a team meeting about it or a Strike team meeting or they got an email. But this was something straight from Confluence saying: "Hey, you know that page you look at, someone changed this and it has a brief description of the change". So if someone adds a new melee weapon, boom changing. That page sent out, uh, a message to all the watchers, which probably was the combat designer, the weapon artist, any of the associated leads. So the lead designer and the lead artist, and also producers and ads that are in charge of that.

So they now know this melee weapon just got changed and here's how it got changed. And if you want to go read, about it in detail, you can go on this confluence page. But all of you are probably affected somehow.

The other thing I like about Confluence was you can still see the old version because it has a history page. Whenever you edit something, it kind of keeps that change. So you can go back and see what the page looked like before it got changed. This is awesome because it lets people go back and go, "Wait what?

What was this melee weapon before? I don't remember, I don't, I don't remember it clearly".

Click on the history page, go back. Oh, it used to be like this. Even better, comments and questions can be can be put in line. So they're like a highlight on a section of text and when you click on it, the comment pops up and it can be a question and all the follow-up comment, all the follow-up comments and answers are there too. And what's cool about that? So you can go: huh, I'm wondering, oh, and you click on it: Oh, someone else wondered that, Oh, and the designer answered it, and then the artist had something to include. Even if those comments get resolved, you can still go back and look at them So you can know: oh, this, was figured out. Here's the chain of logic and discussion that led to it being figured out. I love that in Confluence, because not only does it make it easy to avoid having the same discussions over and over and over — people can see the discussion was already had here, who was here's the people involved, here's what they said and here's how it was resolved — But it may also makes it easy to refer back to the higher level goals. So if you are wondering about something, are you wondering if this feature meets the goal of this page? Or are you wondering if the goal of this page is meeting the design pillar of the game?

Because those are — I' I've often said those are — very different discussions. It Does this new melee weapon meet your melee weapon goals Or do you think that the way we're doing melee in the game isn't good and this weapon demonstrates it? Very different discussions, very different sections of those design docs would be commented on and then referred to.

That's the way we're doing it now. We're still in the 2020s. We're still doing it that way.

The really good reason for this is, I told you, not only does Confluence make changes and discussions easy to have in an online way and recorded and have everybody notified. But with the expansion we did into remote work doesn't matter if the people aren't local. They're still going to get those messages and they can still log in to Confluence and look at all those pages. See the discussions that were had, see what people said, leave their own comments. So you don't actually have to have a meeting about something. You can just mark it as changed or added and everybody will get notified. This is great This way — better than going to people's offices and saying I got to interrupt you and draw something on your whiteboard, especially now that you have teams of 200, maybe 250 people.

So I hope no established. That answered your question on the evolution of design docs and the different problems and solutions that those evolutions provided for.
