+++
title = "Traditional Game Mechanics: What I Tried"
date = "2025-05-30"
id = "4bt6OXPG22c"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design", "TTRPG"]
summary = "I talk about mechanics from traditional games (e.g. board games, dice games, card games, etc.) that I used in my own video games, and that I tried to avoid using, and even ones I wanted to use and couldn't figure out how."
references = ["bNf601IoBpc", "MKEfcaSn7Ko", "4NorMGww9CA", "kqMsdT3Djdw", "qJ7GRXVEf_0", "S2-q_kswvwU"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about traditional game mechanics and what I tried to do in video games based on those mechanics.

This comes from a question from sherner, who asked: I know You' made a video game about board games that have influenced you, but I was wondering, since you mentioned reactivity, multiple solution puzzles and roleplay as defining elements of your games. As you said it yourself, all stem back to traditional ttrpg design choices, obviously D and D being our biggest reference. So what other elements of traditional gaming, IE non-digital formats such as board games, have influenced Your Design philosophy and style? Was it a conscious decision to implement them into your games or would you try to distance video games from traditional gaming? Finally, what other elements have you liked to experiment and transposed video games throughout your career, but you couldn't figure out a way to do it?

Good question. I've touched upon those here and there in other videos, so I think you're going to see me giving reference is a lot, but I will try to summarize them. But, as always, if I say I have a video for it probably goes into a lot more detail on that particular topic, then I'll do here. Because I have talked about, as sherner mentioned, the influences of tabletop games on my video games. There's a video for that, then, because people ask specifically about DND and all the different versions, I did a separate video about that with, which is how each version you can kind of see influences from it in my games. But I've also talked about writing my own tabletop role playing game and what I would try to do and what I wouldn't, which is kind of like my video game stuff going back to influence a tabletop design. I've also talked about adapting tabletop RPGs into video games, which is, you know, its own thing. So I'm going to assume you watched all those videos I made, bring them up and touch upon things I've mentioned, but I'm not going to go as in depth. So let me talk about traditional game mechanics that I saw in tabletop games, board games, card games and stuff that I that I tried using some.

I'm going to break it up into three things. I'm going to talk about what I actually ended up using in some of my games. I'm going to talk about some that I just avoided.

I was like it works great on the tabletop. I don't want to do that in a video game. And then I'll talk about a few that I tried but could never quite figure out how to do it and still maintain my POV and my design: pillars and things like that.

So let's talk about, first. I'll start with a few things that I saw in traditional games and I wanted something like that in my game. The first one would be how cards display information. If you've played the, if you played Fallout, and you've seen those perk cards and skill cards, it's down there in something we called the skill decks, which was spelled de, like dexterity, but it was really just a short in form of a de ckss like: here's the deck of cards. Those were straight out of board games in fact.

Uh, Leonard barski, who drew the first Vault boy, said that that was based on Mr Moneybags for Monopoly. It was kind of that kind of thematic game mascot. And then those cards were like the Monopoly C cards where it told you something that was that you could do some skill effect, some perk effect, and then it had a funny little cartoon of Vault boy experiencing that situation. Similarly, I played a lot of games — tabletop RPGs and a few board games that had critical failures, that you could roll so badly that something bad happened, and I put that into both Fallout and Arcanum. When I played DN d and I played ad andd or D and D version one, whatever you want to call it. When I played that in high school they didn't have critical success or failure, but I wanted them so much that I ended up adding my own home brew system and then a really cool system came out. I think it was in Dragon magazine. I ended up using that and what it was: whenever you succeeded, there was a percent chance that you would critically succeed, and whenever you failed, there was a percent chance that you would critically fail, and the percent was based on how far above or below the roll you rolled. Love those things. I put it in Fallout, Arcanum.

A lot of people don't like it. Um, I, I know people will restart Fallout if they critically fail too often. At the beginning some people were put off from playing Fallout because they critically failed and same thing happened in Arcanum. It's why Fallout has a hidden, um, some hidden code I put in it that prevents critical failures for the first game day, because I just didn't want to discourage people from playing and I've talked about maybe Fallout needed a setting to just turn those off, because in on tabletop when you do the role, you accept it. When the game rolls for you, don't accept it. But I talk about Dice and things I stayed away from. But one last thing was a lot of tabletop games had the ability for you, the player, to override a role, any board game. When you get to a vague role, you can talk to the other players and maybe not, do they? Oh, that doesn't apply to me, when I played the, tabletop RPG called Tor, it had these things called possibility points that you were awarded for doing amazing things during role playing and you could use those to override the DM. You know, you roll something and it, you missed and you go. No possibility point I hit, or you hit and you go and now it's a crit.

Those were the direct inspiration for fate points in Arcanum, so I just wanted to throw that out there. I have been influenced by Bard and other tabletop games and brought those elements into my own RPGs. But now let me talk about some things that I stayed away from, or tried to stay away from, because the first I going to talk about is character creation — Randomness. I like making every part of your player character. I like you being able to name it, I like you being able to pick a background, I like you being able to pick a gender. I like you to be able to pick all your attributes and skills and perks and whatever it is for you to have.

Now you can't just let people buy them all up to Max or have them all at Max, so I usually put some kind of Point buying system in. I don't like Randomness because I used it in one game, Temple, because that's how D and D worked. You rolled dice for your character and we just put a reroll button in there, because we knew if people started the game and they didn't get a good character, they just restart the game. So we tried to make it easy on you and just say, okay, here's a roll button. Plus we Al putting qti in, there be U.

If you reroll — I think it's 100 times — it makes a comment like: whoa, you know you rolled 100 times. You're hardcore, but in general I like to stay away from character creation Randomness because it for me, it's as bad as not being able to create your character at all. I've also stayed away from builds that use cards. We used cards as a display element and Fallout, but I'm talking about games where your build is your randomly dealt abilities from a deck of cards or when you're playing the game it, gives you a card to do things. I have a video about deck builders. I like them. I didn't want that in my RPG.

Again, it's a source of Randomness — that in a tabletop game that works in a computer game, you can do better than that. Similarly with dice, and I'm going to preface this with, don't get me wrong, I love B's Gate 3, but in general I don't like my role playing games to actually have simulations of physical dice that roll, because — and don't get me wrong, I like dice, but I prefer usually bigger ranges than you can have, you know, D20, even D100, and also exposing the roles. Having a what looks like a physical model role. It feels a bit like a gimmick if your game isn't a dice themed game. So if you're making a yatsi game, knock yourself out, but if you're making a role playing game, I I steer clear of saying let's simulate the dice roll physically, let's model it in the game. Other things I tried to stay away from is — and this is going to be the opposite — these are things I avoided be because tabletop games did them better and that is I tried not to think about. Oh, I've got to simplify this mechanic so a human can do It's why I stay away from cards and dice rolling, because I don't mind a lot of bonuses. I don't mind unusual ranges of roll with lots of bonuses coming in with all kinds of stacking rules.

You know like. You only take the top, the highest one, or you add them together, or it's a percentage of the additional ones. As long as humans can understand them, I don't mind if it's tedious for them to compute them by hand, because the computer is doing it. You understand the rules. It's like: oh, I understand.

I have 15 different bonuses that factor in. It's only going to take the highest and those bonuses can fluctuate based on time of day and my fatigue level and all that.

You understand it. The fact, that calculating that by hand and keeping track of it on a character sheet don't have to worry about that. So I try not to simplify rules so that humans can use them. I just try to simplify it so humans can understand them. The base rule here is: if, I've never made one of my design pillars be, let's simplify this rule So eventually a border card game version can be made of this game. That is not a priority for me, so that's what things I stay away from board and TBL talk games.

Now let's dive into the other part of this, which is: what have I tried that didn't work out? If you've watched this Channel or you played The Outer Worlds, you know that I was trying to get something like flaws working for decades, because Fallout had traits which was a good thing glued to a bad thing, but that was the only way you could get that in there. So what I wanted specifically for Flaws was a negative thing that you gained after character creation. Preferably you could choose it, and I have a whole video about the evolution of flaws and what I had to go through to eventually come up with a video game that had a really cool flaw mechanic. But there are other things that I have tried for decades and never quite figure out.

One of them is nonnumerical roleplaying game attributes. There have been a lot of tabletop RPGs have done this. I should say it exists and they're old: Amber, Amber dice.

You don't have a strength, you get points, you bid on it and if you win you are the strongest character. Nobody stronger than you. Same thing for all the other Utes. It's interesting. I did a talk at reboot and I link the video below where I talk about using triangles to represent different attributes on the character and by rotating this simple geometric shape, people will know well, I'm either really strong but not very dextrous, or I'm pretty at strength and dexterity, but then my Constitution is really really bad. It allows you to make a character that isn't great at everything, but you. It's very easy for people to understand shapes. A lot of people understand shapes way better than they understand numbers.

Never could figure out how to get that working well in a game. Some other things that I've never been able to do. Other games have done it not super happy with their implementation.

One of them is insanity. Um, I wanted to make a game once where the character literally saw the world differently than it was, because either they were insane. Or they had experienced some kind of severe trauma, but they were seeing the world differently than the world actually was. And then there were points in the game where you would actually see it for what it was. Maybe when your health was low, maybe if you died as you fell over the it melted and you saw the world for what it really was, or maybe you could. There was some form of telepathy and you, see the world through someone else's eyes. You're like, oh my God, what am I seeing? What do I see?

Never could figure out how to get that work, and usually artists would yell at me saying: I'm not making twice as much art for everything you want to do. And then the last thing I could never quite figure out is random backgrounds, Powers, effects. This isn't like what I said about dice, this isn't character. Creation I'm talking about, while you're playing the game, you may get assigned, you may learn a random background about yourself. You may get assigned a random power or some effect goes on you randomly.

The reason I can never figure this out is why this works well on some tabletop games. Like you're playing along and it's like: oh no, turns out I'm the son of a demon. Oh no, it turns out that I can actually shoot Fireballs from my nose. But I didn't know I could do That's wild.

The reason you can't do this in a video game is most of your players will simply make a save game and reload it until they get what they want. So, unlike a tabletop, which doesn't have save games, save games ruin a lot of things I want to do now. I'm not saying get rid of save games, I'm just saying once: you put a pin in the fact that your game has save games. There's a lot of design elements from tabletop games that I could never figure out how to do, because people would just go back and use save games to ruin the experience. Maybe one of you guys can figure out how to do it, maybe you. Maybe it's a form of bargaining with the player going: I'm putting in save games, but please don't use it, because you're going to enjoy the negative things because they make something fun.

We'll see. I could never really figure out how to do it, so never did. Anyway, shearer, I hope that answered your question.
