+++
title = "Awards"
date = "2024-10-09"
id = "4S8H7CIdSVA"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers"]
summary = "I talk about awards, including ones my games received, ones I received, and one I secretly coveted."
references = ["hZEosFcqmcU", "KAgpPVVe5pQ", "vQj5rJry4Pw", "YMY5LUNdS-8", "1NtaWFyo1ps", "bLNGW1M8N5g"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Awards, specifically game awards, more specifically, game awards that my games have won and a few that I personally have won.

And then just one thing that's always eluded me for the most part, with one exception. I want to just talk about it because some of you may be going: oh I, I know how you feel when I, when you get to the end of this, may be going, wow, how narcissistic and egotistical are you.

So let's talk about it, so, over the years, my games have gotten a lot of awards and I think they deserved it I think the team did a fantastic job and the games did some amazing things, especially for the time in which they got released. Fallout won a lot of role playing game of the Year Awards for magazines and different websites. It also even got put on lists of top PC games of any genre, and one of them — I think it's on actually two top PC games. Of all time, which is just amazing. I mean that it kind of shows that it was influential.

Now I I mentioned at one point that there was someone who was really upset when I left interplay and basically told me I was a one — hit wonder and I had nothing to do with the success of Fallout. Arcanum came out three years later. Arcanum got RPG of the Year from several places and I'm like woo now once again had a great team. But I was on both of those and I'm like, hey, I contributed. I think I'm doing a pretty good job and fast forward.

You know, The Outer Worlds got a lot of awards, a lot of RPGs of the Year from several places too, and there were people who didn't like the game and they — they do this cognitive dissonance thing to try to no, there's no way it could have possibly. Gotten those Awards, well, guess what? It got nominated for a bafta for its writing and I'm super proud of that, and I had nothing to do with the writing. So I'm just putting it out there as the awards for my games have continued, but none of these were Awards to me. None of these were people like: hey, you specifically did a really good job. Yes, I have gotten some non industrywide Awards, in other words, I've gotten Awards to me at specific companies. When I was at interplay, um, and I made GN gnw — um, there's a video about out what that is — and I mentioned when I first started it I had the executive producer saying: why are you wasting time on this?

No one's going to use it. People here don't use other people's software.

And by the end of the year there were at least three or four games that were using it and I think a total of six or seven may have shipped from interplay. Sitting on top of gal, and I got an award later, years later, when I was at obsidian, I told you when we were making South Park, they wanted, to redo the combat system, and the way they did it was they broke people into teams — uh strike teams, which ironic for combat strike teams — and everybody made their own combat system, and I made one which was: uh, turnbas, but you didn't go back to your starting point, so rather than run out and attack and run back, you ran out and attacked and then you stayed there and then other people could run out, and then there were there were bonuses and penalties from being attacked from behind, and so and it did not make it into the final game, but I did win an award. For it when we launched for a really cool alternative combat system, um, even carbine, which I've talked about how not a huge fan of my time there and but it was an amazing team. I got an award there too, called the Cornerstone award, for my contributions to the game. So I have been recognized within companies, but outside of that, almost until now, I could say I've never been recognized at the industry level.

Now I did. In 2017. I went to the reboot develop conference in De brnik in Croatia and I won the reboot hero award — and huge thanks to deir doovic, who you know sponsored getting me this award and it was amazing. But let's go back just a little bit. I remember having a discussion.

It was soon after I started at obsidian, so it was 2011, so that's almost exactly. I started obsidian in October, of 2011. I'd been in the industry for 30 years and a couple months, so this was my 31st year in the industry.

I had mentioned to a few folks we were sitting around talking about something and one of them had said something about: would South Park win Awards? Would they get any awards? And I mentioned to a few of them that you know it's really nice, some of my games got Awards, but I had never personally won an award. The uh reboot award was 6 years away and I still remember it because I got several responses to it and I remember talking to my office mate later about those responses, because there were three different kinds of responses. I got to just that statement of I've never personally received an industrywide, an industry recognition award — the first person — or I shouldn't say the first person, because several people had ideas — and there were just three types.

The first type of response I got was: oh, that's because. You don't Network, you don't go out there, you don't go to conferences, you're not meeting people, going to dinners, shaking hands, giving talks. So a lot of people even aren't aware, they just they're not even aware that these games came out and you were part of them. You know They may be, uh, some of their favorite games, but they don't know you and they don't know. Even if they, and if they even see you in the credits, they don't really know what you did or if those games had were good, had anything to do with you and I'm like okay.

The second one was: well, your games came out in years where there was a lot of competition. So when Fallout came out, a few months later, balers gate came out, um, the RPG. You know, genre itself just revived, so by the time Arcanum came out it was competing against a lot of really, really good RPGs. And RPGs had gone first person and so just a lot of competition.

I'm like okay, and then the Third type — I shouldn't say person. The third type I got was: do you really deserve one? Are you that egotistical that you think that you deserve an industrywide recognition award? And I remember thinking, huh, maybe not, maybe I'm. That's my ego poking out now.

All three of these responses made me think. Although sometimes I thought about um. It made me think about the speaker, because the person I shared in office with after everyone had left, said: you do know that some of them were trying to be kind and some of them were trying to be unkind. I think maybe he knew I sometimes don't get that. I don't know why people say what they w, why they say I just like, okay, that's what they said and he said, yeah, I think the first group saying you need to network was being a little kind, but that last group of saying you don't deserve one was kind of be trying to be unkind and he goes. I think the answer is somewhere in the middle of: well, maybe your games came out when there's strong competition and maybe people just don't know who you are and I was like, okay, that made me think about it, so that I thought about that and I'm like, huh, some of those people were deliberately trying to be unkind. But then it made me think about what does it say about my desire to be recognized? Why did I have this?

And I thought about it a long time and I'm going to say right now that this video is not me trolling for an industry award. And despite me just saying that, some of you are like, no, that's why you're doing it. And I also realized now that I've been doing this a year and a half, I realized that, despite me saying no, some of you are still going to think that's why I'm doing it. These are the same people who think I started the channel because I wanted to eventually have a Kickstarter for a game I was making or I was trying to get a publisher deal or any of that. And no matter what I say and the fact that I got offered a deal and I said no, those people still believe it. They just it's like: nope, that's what he's doing. I can read mines: that's what he's doing.

So I don't know how to convince people that I'm not. Trying to troll for an award here, but I'm not. Although those kind of people — that's one of the reasons a lot of other, my fellow developers — won't make YouTube channels. They just can't take that kind of. I hear what you're saying. I'm going to assume the worst about you and, no matter what you say, I'm right, you're horrible.

I made a whole video about why my fellow developers are not making YouTube channels and I will admit that for part of my career — maybe I should say the first half — there was an industrywide game developer recognition award that I really wanted. I coveted it and I had told some of my co-workers, so maybe I wasn't that secret that I really wanted it I actually attended a couple of the award ceremonies thinking I wonder if I'm going to get called, and I was never called. I watched other people go up, and get it — they toally deserved it — and I was like, yeah, I can totally see why that person is getting the award. And all I can tell you in the in the last half of my career past that, I feel like I have moved past that I haven't thought about that award in a long time. In fact, I thought about it when I was thinking about writing this video and I was like, oh yeah, there was that award I really wanted and I realized I haven't thought about that award in at least a decade. So I can honestly say I think I've moved past wanting it. But it made me wonder what I could have done differently.

This isn't a regret. I don't have a whole lot of regrets about what I did. I have some regrets about what I didn't do. But it's kind of a fair thought and it's not even when I thought about It's not even what I could have done differently. It's kind of what should I have done things differently? Should I have done different things to try to get some kind of industry recognition? And I realize now, as I get to the closing chapter of my career, I really care more that my games are out there and that some of them are 20, closing in on 30 years old people still like them, still think they're good games and still think they're influential, that there are elements of those games that are driving development and design of current games and I can't think of any better kind of Legacy than that. So I think that would more than suffice. I think that kind of makes me happy and fills that hole I had of gee. There was no industry award, plus I got that reboot one.
