+++
title = "Damage Types"
date = "2025-02-17"
id = "4vdu4k-krXQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Combat Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about damage types."
references = ["H_Ddhxf7ASk", "SH35RmM1BFM", "GTMdWT8Lb9k", "96uGEA0r6Bo", "nnH4XJBHvFQ"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about damage types.

I honestly thought that I had a video on damage types. I didn't, but I sure have talked about them a lot. I recently did a video on localized damage systems — I think it was last week, um — where I talked about damage types and even mentioned like Elemental damage. I didn't really talk about what those were, and this led Juma Fallout to ask Tim, following up on the lineup thought: how do you handle different damage types? Always comes to mind Fallout with specific armors, like the Tesla armor or the EMP damage that only did Splash damage to the PC.

If they were unarmored. And since uh jum is a master, this is why you're getting this video so quickly. But he was the only one who asked.

Renatus media asked: have you discussed Elemental damage in game design before? It feels complicated to actually design, for it can be, and the reason I also included renatus media's question is: in addition to talking about different kinds of damage types, I think I'll throw in and — and there's a lot, a lot more than just Elemental and some of it will be specific to your setting. But there's also a lot of pros and cons of what you should consider very carefully before you decide to have a lot of different damage types and again, I can't answer whether it's going to be good for you. It's going to depend on your game and remember, your game has design goals, because those are the first things you made.

So let's talk about damage types. A lot of games don't have them. They're just damage. Is this weapon or this creature does this many hit points of damage and it comes off your HP bar?

Now they may or may not have armor that either does damage resistance or damage threshold, and in my mind that is. Damage resistance is a percentage that comes off the damage that comes in. So if you have a damage resistance of 10% and you take 10 hit points, you really only take nine because 10% of 10 is one. So one gets absorbed by the armor. The rest, um comes out of you.

Maybe the armor just absorbs it or maybe it actually damages the armor, and then you have a whole system on repair which some players love and some players hate. Armor can also do what I call damage threshold, DT. But DT comes in two flavors. One is what I consider like DT Min, and the other is DT reductive. DT Min is you have to do at least this much damage to get through to the armor, but once you do, it all goes through. So if you have a DT of five and somebody hits you for 10 hit points, uh, DT Min says, okay, 10 is greater than five, so you take 10. But if someone hits you for two, it goes: two isn't greater than five, you take nothing.

Compare that to DT. That's done in a reductive form where, in the same situation, if you get hit with 10, your DT of 5 means, okay, 10's greater than five, but five gets subtracted, so only five gets through, as opposed to if you get hit by two, it's under five, so nothing gets through. So there's a bunch of different ways you can do different things with just a basic hit points and no sets of damage types — and then I want to get into a little more there are. If all you're going to have is physical damage — but I'm going to talk about lots of you know wildly different, know Elemental and even other specialized damage — all you're going to do is physical damage. That can come in different flavors too, and some games call it physical, some call it kinetic — um, I've some that do. A lot of guns call it ballistic.

Basically just means you've been hit with something material. But there are games that break that down into different types. Gerps does this, a lot of tabletops do this. For example, GP says cut, crush and pale. Cutting is slicing, uh, crushing is, you know, slamming into and then impaling is actually breaking into you. They do this because you can not only give different weapons different things like a sword cuts, a club crushes and an arrow impales, but then you can have armor that has different resistances against those different types of physical damage. It's a great way of like comparing chain and plate. They're both metal, but chain is really good at preventing you from getting cut and even pretty. Good at preventing you from getting impaled, but it does almost nothing against crushing because it's so flexible.

Compare that to Plate armor, which does well against all of those. So that's a way of distinguishing chain and plate in a very simple, numerical way that players can quickly look at and go: oh, chain, is this, Plate's this? You might go well, why would, wouldn't I always want plate?

Well, may do things like limit your dexterity or weigh a lot. There's all kinds of ways you can balance out the different damage type: resistances that those armors can give or damage thresholds. So now let's talk about Elemental damage, because you see that in a lot of games and it's because it's a very simple way of conceiving the different damage types and displaying them to the player. Usually, if it's done as Elemental, you think of it as fire, water, air. And Earth, although that does raise some questions.

Everybody knows what fire d Dage is, what's water damage? So that's often converted into cold SL ice, so you have freezing damage, and then air is often changed to something like shock or electrical. So you know that it's that kind of damage. But then Earth you're like what is Earth? So sometimes Earth is used as the physical damage. So if you use an elemental damage type, Earth turns into the physical that you already have, and then that gives you an additional. The other three Elemental damages are fire, cold and electrical. There are far more damage types you can do than just that, though there are. I put these all in a category I called specialized damage.

The first one is you can always directly damage a player's attributes. So you can say if you get struck for damage your, maybe your strength is. Reduced, either on the next round or for the next few rounds or until you're healed. Or it could be you could do it if, you watch my video on Specialized damage location, it could be: if you're hitting the legs, maybe that reduces your dexterity or your speed. Until that's healed you could have um, like a drug that if you get poisoned with it makes you fall head fog, your head foggy, you can't think straight. That reduces your intelligence stat, and if you're playing a game with magic — and there's magic, there's intelligence minimums on spells or intelligence somehow controls your Mana Pole or what level of spell you can cast. Suddenly getting your intelligence damag is a really bad thing.

But there's other ways of doing specialized damage. You're all familiar with poison damage, and poison damage can be something that either does damage to your regular Health Point pool. Or you may even have your own health pool for that. I don't really want to get into all that because you can do different Health Pools by area. You can have a different Health pool for every damage type you have. That's a totally different topic, but poison is a very common damage type that's kept separate from the other ones, especially because it's often used as a DOT, a damage over time. Radiation is also similar. Radiation is kind of like poison damage but again, it's something that does your setting support this.

It a Magic game. You probably don't want radiation damage, but in a post-apocalyptic game you almost certainly do want radiation damage and you may also have poison damage. So those two things may be separate and they may use their own pulls, their own resistances and thresholds or they may use something similar. You can also have corrosion, SL acidic. Damage. This can come from creatures. This can come from just environmental effects.

It's great to have on traps and again, this is something that you can do your own drdt against that. Some games, especially Fantasy games, have the idea of a negative energy void, energy life force draining stuff and that will drain your hit points. But it's coming from something else, so maybe you need a magical protection against it or magical armor maybe can help you against that. So finding a Dr or DT resistance against negative energy damage may be really hard to do. And then, even though I mentioned that you can have electrical damage, your game May require that to be broken down further into additional specialized like plasma or laser, and you may go: wait, aren't those just type of energy damage? Yes, but there you can easily see why fire and Laser damage would be treated differently.

With armor. Some armor which is really good against fire may not be good against a laser, and since lasers can be reflective by shiny a blade of armor but that wouldn't do anything to fire. You can see why in, if your game has enough richness in it, you might want to distinguish between fire, plasma or laser in your damage types, which is a good segue now into talking about the pros and cons of having a lot of damage types. I'll do the pros first, because I think the pros are pretty obvious. First of all, you can just do a lot more damage.

That's more specific, more realistic if that's what you care about. But just having damage, that's more appropriate. So a fire Elemental hits you for fire damage, but a water Elemental may hit you for Cal damage. That's just makes sense, then they both just hit you and you. Take hit points because of that.

Having lots of damage types gives you a lot of variety in a lot of parts of the game. You can have lots of different weapons because you have lots of different ways of dealing damage and some weapons can do multiple damage types. You can have lots of armor because even though armor can be made of similar materials, the way it's constructed it gives you different Dr and or DT against all those different kind of damage types that you've already had and addition to all the other things you can put on the armor, like how much it weighs and how much it um reduces certain skills or attributes while you're wearing it. Creatures — you can get a lot of variety in creatures can now suddenly creatures can do lots of different damage types and that's scarier to the player. Same like creatures traps you can have. Traps in the world that hit you with spikes — maybe they hit you with poison spikes, maybe they hit you with acid spikes. You suddenly have a lot more cool traps to do and then, along with all of that stuff are special effects. You get to go to your artist and go: I need acid and I need plasma and I need fire and I need, you know, electrical.

There's a lot of different cool special effects can be made, and now your game is visually more interesting. Finally, it gives you more leverage points for balancing all the things I just mentioned: weapons, armor, creatures, traps. By leverage points I mean when you're going into balance things, you can adjust different values.

So there is no one best armor or an armor that's just not very good at all. This will make the minmax players unhappy because they won't be able to go. This is the single best armor in the game, but it is great for distinguishing different armors, especially ones that like look very different.

Chain looks very different from plate. They're both just metal armor, but if you have th those different physical, uh — damage types, You Now understand why chain and plate are so different in combat. Which brings me to the cons, though. Once you introduce all those different damage types, you are introducing a lot more complexity in rules, in your underlying system mechanics. You don't always need that much complexity, or you can offload the different damage types into a status effect. I did a whole video on status effects and their implementation.

I'll link it below, but, for example, if you want some like some kind of weapon that damages your strength, it could instead just apply a status effect that reduces your strength. Similarly, if you don't want to have poison as its own type, you could just say this creature does poison and when it bites you it does some physical damage and then applies a status effect that does physical damage over time. That is looks like poison and it's called Poison as a status effect, not a damage type.

Once you do all these things, the players will need to understand what is happening and how to plan for it. Once you have all these different damage types, players need to understand why a particular creature or trap hurt one of their characters a lot and another one of their characters very little, because of all the different damage types and damage resistances and damage thresholds that you may have put in your game. You also want to know: do they even want all these? Is this a complexity that your players will appreciate or do just make? Your game needlessly complicated?

Bear in mind I've always talked about how UI is hard to get done. Well, this is a great time to bring up how difficult it will be to make a UI to convey all of this damage type and damage resistance and damage threshold to the player. I talked about special effects, indicating that something was happening to the player, but the player will almost certainly want to look at some kind of character sheet and see the different damages that are on them, to see their different damage resistance and thresholds and how they you know, and maybe a tool tip for how those things work, so they can understand what's going to happen in combat. I have not one, but two videos about damage numbers, and the first one's about how to display damage numbers. So when you get hit and a number flies off of you, if you have lots of different damage pools or damage types, you may want to color or, uh, put an effect on or move those numbers in different ways to convey those types. Remember, don't just color them differently. CU color blind people might, like me, will get unhappy.

The second damage video — Damage number video — was just about how you might want to balance those, but I've done an entire other video on just balancing features in general. They're all linked below, when you put in all these different damage types and then all the corresponding different types of armor and creatures, you have to balance all of that and you've made your life both easier and harder because you've given yourself more levers to turn and you know knobs to turn and levers to change, to knobs to turn and levers to change. But you then have to do all that and make sure you don't accidentally make something worthless or the best thing in the game to have. So let me give you a quick summary of just what all I said, because I realized I've been talking about damage for 15 minutes. Damage type — the lots of types — give you lots of variety. That can be fun, but it gets really complicated really fast and it affects a lot of other parts of your game, from the UI to balancing to just players understanding what's going on in your game. And if you can make it fun and easy to understand, great.

If you can't, you may want to question: why are you doing this in the first place? Anyway, I hope that answered your question. Juma Fallout and ratas media.
