+++
title = "Arcanum Generated Dialog"
date = "2023-08-01"
id = "5l7YcGCQ5Ck"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Dialogue", "Narrative Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about arcanum's generated dialogue system, and I know"
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about arcanum's generated dialogue system, and I know

I've been talking about Arcanum a lot, but I mean I've got the code right in front of me. I've been going through it a lot, I've been playing with it, and the generated dialogue system is something I'm particularly proud of because it let the few designers that were on arcanuman — we had even of the fewer designers, we had even fewer narrative designers — and it let those few people I mean think about. We only had 14 people Tops on Arcanum and just a few writing dialogue. They let them make so much content in the game, which so it was a good tool. But in particular, I liked it because it really doubled down on arcanum's reactivity, and I'll talk about why, um, when I get to the NPC one. But this could be really long, I'm probably talking really fast, but there's just so much to talk about and it's a detailed topic for me.

Anyway, our generated, dialogue system in Arcanum consisted of a number of op codes. I called them dialog op codes. The way they worked was, in the place of what you would write where, what an NPC would say or a player would say, you could write an OP code, and it was just a single letter, like a colon or B colon. It always was followed by colon after the colon.

Nothing might be there, but frequently there were a lot of parameters that were optional for each opcode, op codes could handle lots of different things, and I left the designers decide to turn on and off certain checks that it made, or to provide parameters for things that the op code was going to control, and I'll talk about that. What's important to remember, though, is the op code didn't turn into a single line of dialogue. These op codes expanded in into an entire subtree, and I'll explain that in just a minute. What was nice about op codes is they handled all the gendered combinations. You know, a man talking to a man, female to female, male to female, male, which matters in most languages, but I just remember things like: you know French.

If you'd say you know you are pretty, it would be different depending on the gender of the person you're calling pretty. Um, I know we also had NPC social class, so that could factor into how some lines may get — may have gotten translated into Japanese, which takes social standing into account and how they write things. The, speaking of which the NPCs in Arcanum had one of 11 social classes applied to them. They could only have one, and they were in order of top to bottom. They were Noble priest. Wizard, technologist, shopkeeper, guard, City dweller, villager, beggar, thief and Bandit. So, yes, a city dweller was more up the social standing than a villager, and a wizard was above a technologist, although that there was questioning whether that was going to be switching soon.

Um, in addition to that, opcodes could reference skills and spells attributes you. These were basically part of the parameter list you could pass into it. Okay, after that long introduction, let's jump into what they were.

Um, the NPC. NPC's already had two op codes that were unique to NPCs, and the first one was greeting, which I'm going to talk about last, because this is by far the most complicated op code. But the second one was money, if you added this line to an NPC, they would ask for money and they would do it based on their social class. So, uh, a noble person would ask for.

Money very differently. You know, like sir, I must ask. You know coinage to exchange hands. I'm not a dialogue writer where a beggar would be like: can you spare a couple coins you? The parameters were how much money you would ask for if you didn't put it in. I think it's faulted to 10 coins, but you could put in how much money you're asking for.

And this is a perfect example of how it expanded into an entire tree, the. The M, if you said, wrote M, colon 100. That would expand into the NPC saying: you know, excuse me, sir, but could you spare a hundred coins, or whatever they're gonna say, based on their social class? A shopkeeper would be. You know you, I need 100 coins for that. Then the PC could respond yes or no and if they said yes, the NPC would respond either.

Okay, they've taken the money and it would get subtracted, or you don't have enough money. If you'd say no, it would bow out and then it would go in off to those cases. After getting the money, it would go to the line that that dialogue line said to go to.

The PC, on the other hand, had a zillion off codes. I'm not going to go into detail on all of them, let me just run down them really quick. I think they were alphabetized in code, which is really easy to go through.

There was appreciate. It was basically the PC saying thank you, and you may wonder why we had opcodes for things as simple as that. And that's variety. You could write a colon and be done, and you know that might be thank you, thanks, I appreciate it. That's nice of you, or whatever, and it was by class, so that would adjust.

There was barter bartering. Uh, there was Czech story state. That was an interesting one, if the PC put in a Czech story State op code, it would insert a line where the player would ask about something relevant to the current story state of the game. Remember, I told you Arcanum had 27 story states that went through, as compared to Fallout 23. So we broke the main story into 27 distinct story States.

Each one of those had a set of generic things that the PC could ask about. That story state to NPCs, there was asking for directions to a location, so the up. This was an example of an OP code that required a parameter. Uh, if you asked for it, would. The NPC would tell you how to get there but would not Mark your map.

There was a separate one called X for x. Marks the spot, which was exactly like directions, but also put a mark on your map. We added that because there were narrow designers who wanted both. I should have made it a parameter, but it already had the parameter for location and I tried to avoid extra parameters. We had exit dialogue, which with them saying goodbye, I have to go see ya.

Uh, there was forget it, never mind, because that was a frequently used thing in PC responses. Never mind, I don't care anymore, forget this, forget.

I asked whatever there was asking for healing. There was, uh, asking more questions, there was the generic line of like I have more questions, I want to ask you, because that was a common one as well.

There was a load, a world map, where the player would say something appropriate like I'm gonna go look up my map now, and then would just jump. The player right to load the world map for fast travel purposes from a dialogue.

Um, there was buying a paper, there was the. Oh, there was an M1. What is that? I think that's money as well.

Um, there was a quest, one which I'll explain more in a second. There was saying: I'm sorry, in various ways there was asking for training and you could specify what skill you were looking for training in, and that that was put. It was the narrative designer's responsibility, if the player asks for training, the NPC off, we could look up what training they asked for. They would look up their skill and go: okay, if you asked for training in this skill, oh, I'm a master in the skill, I will offer Master training. There was also use skill. You could ask the NPC to use a skill for you. And this is in addition to like healing or training or anything like that.

There's xmark spot, there was yes, which were a million ways of saying yes, um, there was no — A Million Ways of saying no, uh. And there was also zap, which was you specified a particular spell and it's asking that player to cast that spell. So you, if you wanted a priest to cast resurrect, or uh, speak for that, or something you could say: zap, Z, colon and the spell number, and it would do that.

Now, both NPCs and PCs had two um op codes that they shared. One was insult. As a PC line, it insulted the NPC based on their class. So you would say something like you're the worst Noble person I've ever met, or you're a stuck up City dweller.

For the NPC lines it in it. Insulted the NPC based on the race. So the NPC, based on their own social class, would say something to the player based on whether they're a human, half orc, dark elf, halfling. So we had this huge bank that we had fun making insults like: what would a shopkeeper say to a dark elf they were angry at, or what would a beggar say to a half orc, and so we had tons of funds making those Banks and remember every time these things pulled from a bank. So, even if they just created one line, there were dozens, in some cases multiple dozens, of these lines that they could use. And then finally, there was an, a rumor, one that could be used for PC and NPC. As a PC it was, it would expand to a line basically saying: hey, have you heard any cool rumors for NPCs? It would be offering rumors and again, for the parameters, it could be a single number or a set of numbers or a range of numbers and those were all the rumors that that NPC could offer. It would go look at any NP, any rumor that they already knew. Um, you could the person using op code say: if hey, if they've already heard the rumor, don't do it. But they could override that and say, nope, if I don't care if they pay for a rumor and get something they've already heard.

Rumors were based on story state, where you are in the game, um, and social class. So the NPCs would a beggar, would tell you a slightly different thing about: there's Bandits Down by the River, where a noble person would go, I understand. There are Bandits that have set up camp and are disrupting trade.

So again, we had lots of banks for. Each individual room or had Banks and things that could be said optionally. There was an optional parameter and I tried to avoid too many parameters like this, but rumor just took a ton that you could add how much money, um, that it would cost you to get the rumor and, by the way, internally that was handled by this rumor op code inserting an ask for money op code dynamically in the middle of it. So I mean the rumor opcode expanded it into an entire multi-branch dialogue tree. So this is how we saved money and got variety at the same time.

Now, I said I was going to talk about how quests and green work is ever complicated. Quests were really complex. Quests had seven states, unknown, mentioned, accepted, achieved, completed, by a different NPC, a different PC for multiplayer and botched.

Unknown was, if you'd never heard it, mention was you heard it but you didn't accept it. Except it was when you accepted it. Achieved is when you had done the things you were supposed to do but you hadn't turned it in yet and then completed. What you turned it in, botched was a flag that if it was set on anything that wasn't completed, change the state to botched. But if you took the flag off, it went back to whatever state it was at, and that was because it was possible for the player to be.

Maybe you said you'd rescue some kidnapped person and you got them. So now the quest was in the achieve statement, thought completed, and on the way back they get killed. If you raise them killing when they die their script says botched the quest. But if you raise them, that their scripted to say okay, I'm back alive, unbox the quest, so we'll go back. To achieved, so if you just accepted the quest and on the way to get them they died, it would get botched and going. It would look as failed in your quest log. But if you arrived and healed them or resurrected them it would go back to accept it. So botched was done as a flag so you could go in and out of being a botch state.

Now you can't botch a completed Quest because it's already completed. So if you get the Villager back home, you get the ransom money for uh or the money for rescuing them for the kidnappers, and then you leave and then he dies. It's not gonna botch your quest because you've already finished that Quest. Once the quest is completed, the state is permanent. Um, the way this worked was you would say Q, colon and the quest number, and it would if it was a PC. Line, it would generate a line where the player asked if there are any quests available and the NPC would answer about that quest number. If it was an NPC line, the NPC would Dive Right into something related to the current state. So if it was kidnapping somebody, if somebody was kidnapped, if it was unknown, they'd go: hey, someone's been kidnapped. My, you know, my, husband's been kidnapped. I'll give you 100 coins to go find them. I think the bandits have them, if it was mentioned, the same woman might go: hey, I told you about my husband being kidnapped.

Are you ever gonna go look for him? If it was accepted, she'd say: hey, why aren't you out looking for my husband? You said you promised to do that. If it was achieved, she'd be like: oh, you found my husband and said it to complete it. And if it was completed, she either might say nothing, um, or she might go. You know, I always thank you very much for rescuing my husband, so I love it. And if it was fail to be like, oh my God, I heard my husband's dead, so you can tell how that would expand.

These are interesting. Is these?

These dialogue lines, these Banks, were written specifically for that Quest by The Narrative designer, so they weren't pulled from a generic pool of lines like, say, ask for money or, you know, forget about it, or exit where reading, though, was the most complicated opcode we'd ever made. It was four NPCs. The reason it was so complicated was it covered everything? This is where Arcanum generated a lot of its reactivity from, because the way an NPC opened a dialogue with you is something you usually remember and it would create greetings on a huge number of tests and these tests for the greeting could be skipped or overwritten. Um, if you skipped it, you NG in general did all the tests and I will go over the order: did it, did it in the narrative designer could always say: skip this test, so do test zero and one, but don't do test zero, two and three and then do the rest. You can also say: override it by saying test for that one, but if it's true, don't use a generic Bank greeting. I have my own override for it that I want you to say.

So let me go through what all the tests were and keep in mind these were also by um, NBC, social class. So I'll go through an order, from test zero — because I'm a c programmer — up to uh Tess, uh 11, 10 or 11. Okay, so test zero was it?

Literally checks to see if the NPC is dead? If they are, then because you can't talk to a dead person unless you're using speak with dead, you must be using speak with dead. So, nine times out of ten, 99 times out of 100, The Narrative designer will override this, but if he doesn't override it, would say something like I'm dead and I know nothing.

Why are you, why did you rip me into pain, the pain of the living? Because remember all the Arcanum, uh, dead NPCs are in agony. When you bring them back to life, uh, test one, it would check for associates among the player character. Uh, this is why it was important to only have one player character, because it would go to that player character and say who are his associates. It would check for summoned. Monsters, for animated dead and for illusions. Those were three separate checks with their own banks that it could respond to.

If the NPC was a wizard, he would make a sarcastic comment about your associate like: uh, you know, I learned how to summon fire Elemental when I was 15. Or really, your zombies were tracking mud in here, and it would continue for everyone else. They would make a comment about how afraid they were and to exit the dialogue, which means you would have to, um, get rid of that, the that associate, before you could talk to them. Keep in mind, narrative designers could override that and say: do it, do a fear comment and then go into dialogue.

So it was. You could have it both ways as a narrative designer, um, then it would test for spells that were operating on the player and we're testing this order. Um, it would test invisibility: body of air, body of stone, body of fire, body of water, polymorph, mirror image and Shrink. Now you would test in that order and each one of those spells had its own Bank of comments. Again, if the MPC was a wizard, he'd make a sarcastic comment like: could you please turn the invisibility off?

Fine, I'll deal with you invisibly, or um, you know, polymorph turned you into. It's like: really, you want me to deal with you as a sheep? Fine, but the wizard ones always continued. Otherwise. This is what would happen for all non-wizard NPCs. If you had one of the body spells on, it would do a particular body, comment and exit. If you were polymorphed into a sheep, but comment on that and exit. If you had shrunk yourself, they would make a comment on how adorably small you were, but continue, if it was Mirror Image, they would make a comment about how many of them — which one of you is talking to me, you know, are you Twins? And continue, if it was invisibility, they'd make a fearful comment like who said that was that a ghost? And exit, so again, you had to add narratives on. You had to override it, if that's not the behavior you wanted, then it would do two different tests on your armor.

If you were completely naked, so just in your underwear, because we were a Victorian game — the NPC would respond by their class and continue. So they were like: oh my, you know you're down to your skivvies, or something like that. If you were wearing this armor that was marked as Barbarian armor and there was a flag we could put on any armor, again they would respond by class and continue. So a notable person might go how uncouth, you know where shopkeeper were like oh, we normally don't serve your kind and continue, otherwise we got to work to like test nine or ten. Here you would get greeted by the NPC based on their reaction to you. If it was a first meeting then that was broken into a great greeting.

All these were, um, by class, if they loved you, that you get. A great greeting by class friendly. A good greeting by the NBC's class courteous — again a good greeting by NBC class neutral — a neutral greeting by the NBC's class suspicious — a bad greeting by the PC race dislikes — another bad greeting by the PC race animosity — a worst greeting based on the PC's race.

If you met before we had a different set of banks so they could say: you know, nice to see you again. Or oh, what are you doing here? Again and again it was broken down in the love, friendly, courteous, neutral, in the same groups, by CLA, by the embassies class, or suspicious dislike, animosity, by the PC's race. This, let us do so much. You had a spell that was still running, that made a visual effect. They're probably going to comment on it. You wear certain kinds of armor or you're not wearing armor at all.

They're going to comment on it. You have, you know They like you or don't like you. They're gonna comment on it. They, you've been there before. They're going to get a different comment.

And what I loved about that was shopkeepers were often like: oh, is this your first time in the store, would you like to see the inventory? Versus oh, it's nice to see you back.

That's if they liked you. They didn't like. You.

It's like: oh, it's my big spender, what do You know? What do you want to see this time?

Notice, you may or may not have been a big spender. They're making fun of you because they don't like you, um, and of course, they'd have to do it by race. Or it's like: oh, it look, it's the, half Fork that thinks that it's a person, or you know, I wonder where you got your money from.

So it was just a great way of constantly reminding you of the choices you made. I loved This, that's all the op codes. By the way, that system is what led us put together such a rich dialogue, uh, set in Arcanum, because, even if all the rest of it was handcrafted, that greeting allowed so much reactivity on so many different axes and people noticed and it was. A really good way of kind of It kind of helped people in their minds. Arcanum was just something extra special in that regard. Never done this since, um, when I tried to introduce this in later games, especially at other companies, nobody was interested.

I'm hoping, now that AI has advanced in these llms, these large language model AIS, that something like this could be done, but with a lot more variety, especially now that AIS can also do speech synthesis. So again, I'm hope this is like a primitive, 20 year old generated dialogue system. We could do a lot better today, but I thought you guys would like to hear exactly how it worked in arcade.
