+++
title = "Mini Games"
date = "2026-03-18"
id = "6buACYLTHBI"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["RPG Design"]
summary = "I talk about the pros and cons of putting mini games in your roleplaying game."
references = ["3s7IBpFTaKY"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about mini games.

This comes from a very long set of questions from Mr Doomka. So let me read his questions first, then I want to talk about mini games. Hey, Tim, I understand your mistrust in miniames, but don't they make the games more immersive? I feel like it does, for me, though the miniames are usually a gross o oversimplification of crafts, they let you feel like you're actually doing something — lockpicking, hackpicking, etc.

Without the need or understanding of how it really works in real life, with nuances. Please don't hit me.

Have I? Have I ever threatened to hit anybody?

Anyway, please don't hit me, but I feel like your approach to miniames, taking away from RPGness of the main game, has something in common with takes like tabletop RPGs and text. RPGs are better than immersive 3D games Like books are better than movies and games. But from watching your videos, I know that this can't be your take, because you always say something close to: there are no bad games. There are just bad games, there are games not for you. So now the main question is: if better movies are made following the rule, show, don't tell because of the nature of the media. If you want to tell, just write a book, Don't you have to follow some kind of rule in games like: give the player interactions, don't play them through, because the game's main distinction from other types of media is agency.

For me it's not fun to say I want to pick this lock and roll a dieice. It's much more fun to act and play the role Like I'm a thief that has knowledge from my skill level, which makes the process — lock picking — easier, but I still interact with stuff. For some people, the agency of just choosing to pick the lock is enough, but I feel like it.

Misses all the benefits of computer games. You can show a movie with a bunch of text on the screen, but it's a waste of the benefits of being able to show moving pictures. So if you still don't feel me, I feel you. What other interactions can you suggest instead of mini games that better utilize the benefits of computer games, something that board games and text RPGs can't do? Okay, that's a lot of questions. Let me back up a second and just say here's my definition of mini games, because I know people will otherwise argue about that. I'm not talking about in-game puzzles where your character, as any, as part of any other action he can take, moves things around or pulls switches or drops items or rotates gemstones in the real world, in the game world itself, to open a door or unlock something.

Not talking about those, and I'm not. Even talking about little games that you can play within the main game for no reason, like let's play, say, you're playing a first-person shooter and you come up to an arcade and the actual arcade game, so standup games you can walk up to and click, and now suddenly you're playing Tetris or you're playing Pac-Man. What I'm talking about, my definition of mini games, is a small UIdriven game. It's all played in a user interface that stands in for an action that the player is taking, that they have some kind of skill or perk or is somehow connected to the player's build. Examples of these in games would be lockpicking or hacking or bomb diffusing. These are things that you do, something in a user interface that simulates what you're doing in the game world. It's got a correspondence to it. Many RPGs have these, Mine don't.

Let's talk about. Why, As usual, in fact, if you've watched my channel a lot, I think you're not only going to know what I'm going to do, but you're going to know what my answer is. But what I'm going to do is go across the pros and cons of mini games. I'll start with the pros, so, as Mr Doomcup pointed out, he pointed out a lot of the pros of mini games already.

Let me walk through them, first of all, they are more. It's more fun to do something than to just pass a skill check. And I completely agree with this. It is more fun to try to pick a lock than to just walk up and it says: "This lock requires a 53 lockpicking skill" Great, I have 54. Click, Boom. I agree. There's also the show don't tell, which is for movies and for video games. I treat that as do.

Don't show because the player should do something. And I agree Mini games are a great solution to this. They will let the player actually pick that lock, hack that computer, diffuse that bomb. I agree That's what they're perfect for. Another thing that Mr Doomcod didn't mention but I like, is if you have a miniame, that's a standin for the player's actions in the world. If the player fails, it feels more like it's on them than oh man, I have my.

My lock pick was one point too low, so I have no chance of opening this door. Instead, they get a really difficult puzzle to solve And if they don't solve it, that's on them because there is a solution. So the fact that you didn't find the solution isn't on the game, It's on You could have guessed the right words from the clues they gave. You could have found. The sweet spot for the lock.

You could have cut the right wire for the bomb and you failed. That's what I love about mini games: It pushes that failure state onto the player, which of course, psychologically makes them want to try again, like, oh, oh, you're right, I, I should have. I, I forgot the clue that yellow was ground wires or whatever. I would never do that. I would never put a color based puzzle in.

Who would do that? Anyway, let's get into the cons, which it will explain why I tend not to use mini games. First of all, if you have a miniame that represents some skill or action the player can be taking in the world, it immediately disrupts the game flow, to put it in. So you're playing a firsterson RPG or maybe even a first-person action game in real time, and then suddenly world paused because I'm picking a lock. I've seen this in a lot of games too, like I'm being shot at You. Sometimes the games go. You can't pick this lock while you're in combat, Some let you do it, and then you're literally in combat and bullets are whizzing by and something's about to club you and you're like: hold on, I'm going to pick this lock and game pause, world paused. Suddenly that whole adrenaline rush from combat gone because I'm picking a lock. So that game flow. Many games just take a sledgehammer to game flow. The second thing is abstraction [sighs]. How much can you have?

How far away from actually lockpicking can your lockpick game be? It can't be identical to lockpicking. I do not want to deal with tumblers and lockpicks of varying sizes and nubs on them and all that. That would just I mean to make lockpicking a 3D. Physical realization of actual lockpicking in the world would probably be too hard. So it's got to be an abstraction. But then how much?

And also, are you only going to have one lockpick game for every kind of lock, whether it's on a door or window or chest or desk drawer or combination lock? I've seen games that take all of those and they just make it suddenly it looks like a keyhole and you've got a lockpick. The third thing is they often put way too much emphasis on the player skill And I have a whole video about conflating player skill and character skill and I'll link it below So I'm not going to dive into it too much here. I mean you can go watch me talk forever on that one. But the bottom line is, if there are two build character builds and one has a really high lock, pickick and one has a really low lockpick skill, when the same player approaches a lock, the one with the high skill should be that should find that lock easier. Even though it's the same player with the same knowledge and the same manual dexterity and all that, that lock should be easier to pick than for the character with the low lockpick skill.

A lot of mini games don't really capture this. They may put a little bit in, like maybe there you get an extra um choice or the timer's longer, but they don't necessarily make it easier for the player, They just give them a slightly bigger buffer to fail in. And then finally, making mini games, actually designing them requires a particular set of design skills. I do not have those skills And I will warn you that a bad miniame can put players off using a skill or maybe even playing the entire game. I'm sure you've all played an RPG that had a miniame that you hated so much like.

I don't want to pick that lock. I hate that mini game, or I don't want to diffuse that bomb. I hate that stupid mini game, for me it was. I'm not doing that mini game because it's colorbased and I cannot believe they don't have color-based options in here. So I've not played mini games and sometimes not played a whole game because there's a whole section of it that's cut off to me.

You probably don't want to do that, I can tell you. For The Outer Worlds we talked mini games instead of just skill checks for several of the things you could do in the game. But I remember sitting down with the lead designer, Charlie Staples, and saying "Do you, are you good at this", because I'm not.

If you're saying you want this. You will have to take all the responsibility for getting these done, because I don't know how to make these. You're going to have to make these And there's a skill in making them. And it's kind of like making a 2D game. I mean, you are making a 2D game, an entire UI based game. And it's got to be fun, and it's got to not just be fun the first time, It's got to be fun over and you have to like, and over and over And you have to like, I said, inject the character skill so that the game is easier. The higher your character skill is, You've got to get all that in there.

So what's my conclusion for Mr Doomk's set of questions? Yes, mini games can be fun, however — and this should come as no surprise to anyone who watches my channel — it depends on your design, and specifically your design pillars. Do your design? Do mini gamess fit in with your design pillars?

If they're like mine, where they're like character skill trumps player skill and everything has to be fun, um, over being realistic, Mini games tended not to fit into that. They are more realistic than just having a skill check and they often don't have enough of that character skill over the player skill involved in them. Now you can always change the uh design pillars and I talk about that. There's two conversations. Whenever you want to put something in the game, you have one conversation which doesn't match your design pillars, and then a second, completely different discussion on: well, maybe we should change those design pillars. So mini games may be something that make you go. I want them so much. I'm going to change my design pillars so that mini games fit in. Personally, I've never felt the need to change my design pillars that dramatically to — or drastically — I should say not dramatically, but drastically — to make a miniame fit into my game world.

I do see the pros — I just listed them all — but also I see a lot of cons too. So just weigh that in if you're designing a game on, and think about what are the pros and cons for my game with mini games. And those are my thoughts And, Mr Doomka, that was a lot of questions, Really good ones too.
