+++
title = "Interview Questions"
date = "2023-11-17"
id = "6CNtLuKyx3E"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Interviews and Chats"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about interview questions."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about interview questions.

Stavos Nicolo asks: are there interview questions that you wish people asked you more often? That's a good question. No one ever asks me meta questions like that — uh, not very often — where it's like, instead of asking about a process or something, they're asking a meta question about how the process goes, and my short answer is yes, there are questions that I wish wished people asked more often. There often things that I've done videos for on this channel — um, a big one, the biggest one that I often think is amusing is I rarely get asked about the team. I rarely get asked about people on the project.

Now I understand part of that. Every publisher I've ever worked for has picked someone on the team to kind of be the representative, the person who does a lot of the talking, and I was told in the past it was because people respond to the game having a face. Um, sometimes they even hire someone to do that. A lot of game companies now have a Communications person and they do all the uh interviews. I can sometimes tell, though, when I'm talking to someone who doesn't actually do any development, um, I know they're part of the team, but if they're not actually making any content or anything and you can kind of tell because their answers are somewhat high level and vague. But I wish people ask me more about the team because, as Warren Spectre said, he often gets credited for things he didn't do and I get credited all the time for things I didn't do. People always ask me about characters and dialogues in my games and I don't know how, many times I've said, other than Temple, I didn't do any of those um before. I didn't do them because I didn't have time. That and that wasn't. My role, and after Tempo I didn't do it because I wasn't good at it.

But I wish people asked more about the team so I could tell people: oh, you know that feature you like, she did that. Oh, you know that character you love, he wrote, he wrote them. So I wish people would ask too about fun stories in production, because there's always amusing stories about things that happen, usually involving bugs and trying to fix it. Sometimes bugs we decide not to fix um.

I wish people more ask more questions about specific levels, like: where did you get the idea for this? How did this area get created? I think to, if they ask about particular features, like very specific features, and if they're unique, they're like: well, what made you want to do this? You've never done it before, or — and this is this is where I really, really love. When the person asking the question, it shows their interest. That and the depth of their interest.

When they ask a question like, hey, your last game or games did this, but I noticed you've changed it in this one. Why did you change it? I just had a really fairly lengthy discussion with one of my clients because they wanted to do something that I didn't do. I did it once in one of my games and then I did it completely differently in two more games, and they wanted to know why. I love questions like that because i' I've tried both. It isn't hypothetical. I've made games with both, with doing it both ways, so I don't have to speak hypothetically. I'm like, well, this is what happened when we did it this way and this is what happened when we did it this way. It's more like you know, getting into the nitty-gritty of game development, not the high level.

Well, in theory, you know, Communism works. Thanks, Homer.

Conversely, there are a lot of um questions I really get tired of answering. I just get answered so many times, things like: well, first of all, people ask me a lot of questions that really should be answered by the publisher: what platforms are you coming out on? What languages are you, are you localizing to?

If you think I have any say in those decisions, you're wrong. So I found myself just paring stuff that the publisher told me to say I'm the wrong person to be asking for that. Anyone on the team is really the wrong person to be asking for that. But the other types of questions I don't like are the ones that are just so incredibly generic: what, were your game's influences?

What was the hardest? Part of developing this game? What hurdles did you have to overcome? Are there any new features or unique features on this game that the players would like to hear about?

I'm like you know what. These aren't bad questions, but they apply to every single game that ever came out. I swear sometimes I've been interviewed by people who don't even seem like they want to be there and they're asking me questions off cards that I think they have these same cards for everyone they've ever spoken to and not just um games. That these are questions you could ask people making movies or TV shows or writing books.

And it bores me and I have to put on this fake face of — even though inside I'm like I'm dying. Inside, these question are so boring and I have to come up with an exciting answer and I I can't help but think this: is your job, this is what you do, this is a tiny part of what I do, but this is what you do, and you can't even step up your side of the game. It's like I don't like giving more than someone will give me back. It's — I hear actors say this — that when you act against people who don't give you much back, it makes it much harder for you. I feel that way in interviews, when interviews, when interviewers don't bring anything to it, I find myself it's very hard for me to give anything back. And you can probably tell like I was thinking, because I like to give examples of what's an interview I did in the last five years that I loved and I'm going to talk about another one that I did recently, but I don't want it to be like recency effect. So when we were doing The Outer Worlds — and this is a within a year, within the year it came out, um Game Informer came by to talk to us about it and I still remember that interview because the interviewer, Joe Juba — I hope I got his last name right — um, he was really interested, he seemed really interested in the game and there's a set, there's a video he put, He, put up where it's, 100 rapid fire questions and you would think I'd be like I don't like these because there were a lot of questions that were generic. But in a way Way Joe was really clever because he interspersed it with hardcore questions where you could tell he was trying to find out stuff about the game that we weren't answering yet you know he wanted. He asked questions about companions. He goes: what's your favorite companion? All innocently, even though we told him look. We really can't talk about our companions yet.

Um, he asked: where are there any aliens in this game? Are there any intelligent aliens?

And I'm like we're not going to talk about that. Um, but I thought it was funny and it made me laugh and it I think comes across in the interview that kind of energy, because Joe was doing his job. He was trying to find out as much as he could about The Outer Worlds to give to the people who were going to read his article and watch his videos. And that's smart and it's clever and I liked it was like we had to kind of Spar and the fact that he did 100 rapid fires meant that we were a little bit, you know, off center. It was Leonard and I doing it and sometimes you could tell he would answer a question and we'd look.

At each other like are you going to take that? Because I don't think we're supposed to talk about that, um. But yeah, let me tell you about the, recent interview I did. You saw me wearing shirts the last few days that said TK mantis on it. Um, I did an interview with mantis.

Um, he was very interested in my games and he's incredibly knowledgeable, well steeped in Fallout lore, in fact. At one point I was thinking this is interesting because I think he may know Fallout lore more than I do. And one thing I have to always remind people is people who play Fallout — all the Fallout games — a lot. You may know the lore more accurately than me because on the first two I know things, I know content that didn't make it into the game, um, either because it got cut or we decided it didn't.

Belong, or we just talked about it and we never did it. So sometimes I have trouble remembering what made it into the game and what was just something we talked about and then threw away. So it's hard for me to remember what actually made it in the game. Plus, even though I've played all of the Fallout games — well, all the main line ones I they're the few I haven't played, but I may not have seen all the content, especially, you know, bethesda's games are huge. So I may not have seen all the content in Fallout 3 and Fallout 4. So I don't consider myself the final word in falloutlore.

But talking with mantis, his questions were very specific and very deep and very knowledge-based, and I loved it I loved it. You can tell watching the interview. By the way, we had literally just met, yet we talk in. That interview like we're old friends There are comments about that. I I had never spoken to him before He contacted me and asked if I could do the interview and I thought we were just going to do something over a webcam and then he said no, I'm going to fly into Seattle. I was hoping you could come down and normally I'd be like m, but it occurred to me I've lived here for 3 years in the suburbs north of Seattle and I'd never gone downtown. I'm like, okay, I'll do it'll be a good chance to go downtown and see what's changed. He had texted me and said I'm going to be outside the building, the Studio's in, because it's easy to miss the entrance.

As I was walking down the street I realized I've never met him. I don't know what he looks like, but he knows what I look like. So I'm walking down the street and I see someone and I'm like that dude looks like he's wearing a vault suit, um, and he look, he glances at me and then looks away. But I keep walking and I'm looking at the numbers and I know I'm getting close so I'm slowing down because I know I know I'm. It must be around here somewhere, and he looks back and he goes: Tim, I'm like Patrick and he — he said he didn't recognize, but he told me later he goes: you're taller than I think you would be. And, by the way, I've heard that so many times. So many people, when they first meet me, go: oh, you're taller than I thought you'd be, as if you look at me and most people say, Oh, I thought you'd be maybe 5' 9ish. And then when I turn out to be 61, they're like: and I get it, I look Stout, I look zoftig, um, but just because I'm wide doesn't mean I can't be tall.

But anyway, we were talking, we were just talking outside before we went in and I immediately knew the interview was going to go well, because he was just super casual about it I had asked him if he had questions he wanted to send me ahead of time and he said no, I would rather ask you the questions, um on the show and how get your initial reaction? And I love that because I think I do better when I'm off script. I've told multiple people that whenever I give a talk, whenever I do these, I don't really practice it, because then it comes across as inauthentic. If I practice more than a couple times, it comes across as very robotic.

So what you see? On mantis's interview with me — and I'll put a link below in case you didn't see it — is he and I meeting for the very first time and him asking me questions that I've never heard. I I had no advanced notice he was going to ask and yet we chatted for like we chatted for a couple hours like we had known each other for decades and it was fun. I love that interview, so just for you guys, what this means for you guys, when you ask questions here, the one I'm more likely to answer are ones about gamedev — less stuff that's personal about me or personal about you, because those are things that I feel like well, not everyone really wants to know about that. Most people are coming here to know about game development and also the questions have to be something that would be require a longer video answer if you ask a question that's yes or no or the answer is 12, I can just do that in the comment section and I frequently do, but every now then somebody will say something and I'll be like that's a good question I haven't covered before. Sometimes people ask me the same questions over and over and I'm like there's a video for it, you can go find it. But when it's, if it's something no one's ever asked before or it's an angle into some existing thing I've talked about that I realized I never touched on.

Those are the ones. Those are the questions that I like getting and those are the ones that I do video responses for, like this one. No one had ever asked me what I like getting in interviews and I realized that that would also help me answer the question of what kind of questions do I like?

Getting on this channel? So there you go. That was a longer answer than I thought. And, stavos, Nicola, I hope this answered your question, because you keep answering me good questions and don't think I don't notice that this is not the first time I've answered one of your questions in a video. Have a good day.
