+++
title = "Fallout Was A B-Tier Project"
date = "2023-05-25"
id = "6i8Bx4zYIKQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Fallout", "Interplay"]
summary = "I talk about how Fallout was never a high-status project at Interplay until very shortly before it shipped."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim.

I've gotten a lot of questions about Fallout 2 and also especially why I left Fallout 2 in mid development. I think I'm ready to talk about that, but I'll do that tomorrow, because to understand my answer requires understanding a particular context about Fallout. The first one, the base game. Some people call it Fallout one. I just I can't call it Fallout one. It's Fallout and what I want to. So what I want to talk about today is Fallout was a b tier project at interplay. I don't know why some people from interplay deny this.

It's not. We're not embarrassed. I'm not embarrassed of it, myself and the team we like being a b tier project. We liked the fact that we're off in the corner for years with very little adult supervision.

I'm convinced that Fallout would not have shipped, or would definitely not have shipped the way it was, had it been more of a um. What should I call it? A regularly made planned, and processed game at interplay, the whole thing with You know how Fallout began and I've talked about this in other places — where Fallout — was created because I was playing with engines and then I bought some pizza and invited people to come talk about settings after hours. I mean, all this was great. It turned out to be great in the long run because not as many people came to that meeting, but the people did were really passionate about willing to make a new game, and I think everybody who ended up coming to those meetings ended up on the final team and we had a great team.

So I'm not saying B tier in necessarily a negative sense. I'm just saying there were a lot of other projects at interplay that were better funded, had bigger teams and were prioritized in the internal uh. Pipelines above Fallout, so, and also I'll point out that that all this changed a few months before Fallout shipped. And two things changed it before Fallout shipped, about six months, people in QA started requesting, started coming in evenings and weekends on their own time for free to play Fallout. Some of those QA people were turning down, paid overtime on other projects, which then got me in trouble. I got called into the executive producer's office saying: hey, we can't get people to do overtime because they're playing Fallout on their own.

Are you encouraging this? And I had to tell them I'm not encouraging this but I am encouraged by it means I think we're on to something here. Also, Brian Fargo took home a copy of Fallout — I'd say late spring of 97, and it shipped in October, late September, early October that year, and he called me that.

Weekend: hey, I'm stuck here. Hey, how do you do this? Is there a way? How many ways past this Quest are there?

And he was really excited about it and when he came back he was telling people about playing it. Then, and only then, did I start getting people outside the team really interested in what we were doing. But let me walk through why I'm think and I'm going to say can prove that that Fallout was a b-tier project at interplay.

First of all, let's talk about the team. I already talked about how he got it together, but the team on Fallout was made up of three kinds of people and some people were in more than one of these groups. There were a lot of people who were relatively new and inexperienced. Fallout was either their first project or their first project in the role they were in. It was the first project I was in charge of. It was my fourth game in the industry. I had made grandstand Bridge, Bard's Tale Construction Set and Rags to Riches before Fallout, but all of those I was doing programming and some design. This is the first time I was the project leader. I was the producer.

A lot of people on Fallout this was their first time role. A lot of them it was their first game. It was Jason Anderson's, I mean. He was hired directly into do Fallout, although I think he ended up doing some Stone keep work as well. So we had a lot of new and inexperienced people. We also had people that I called quiet powerhouses. These were people who were not universally recognized as being really awesome at what they did and I noticed there were several people like this at interplay that were just always quiet.

Their nose to the grindstone, their pen to paper. They were just working all the time and they did great work, but they never promoted themselves. They weren't the ones to speak up in meetings so they weren't seen as the go-getters or whatever. But they were the people I wanted, people who would really wanted. I wanted people who would really want to work hard and make this game good. And then the third Group, which is funny because I'm not going to name names, but there are a number of people assigned to my project because they were considered problem employees on other projects. And let me tell you, with one exception, which I dealt with early and so really didn't have much to do with the project and got rid of that employee, the other ones were great. I didn't see what the problems were, to the point where I actually went to a couple producers to say what was the problem with this person and I came to realize that the problem was the managers. They were the problem. They — some of them — tried to handle every employee has the same employee. They, had this one method of dealing with employees and if the employee didn't like it, they were. They were a problem, and I learned that there were. I had people on my team that would get upset if I didn't come by and check with them every day. They'd get upset, and then there were other people who, once I signed them a task, would get upset if I checked in on them. If they said it took three days, they didn't want to see me for three days.

So I learned that and that's how I managed. Now it was interesting because at one point about a year and a half into making Fallout, I was invited to speak at the monthly producer meeting, which I usually skipped. I was just, I was too busy because other teams had noticed that our team was very motivated and full passion and just loved what they were doing and like stay late and would work on things — and we're always talking about what they were working on when they'd go to lunch with other people and they wanted to know how I did that and I was like I'm not sure I understand, but I wrote down what I thought were obvious things to do as a project leader and I talked to them. In fact I can do a video on that because I found my talk, I found my notes. Um, I could do a whole talk on how to motivate a team, Circa 1995..

Maybe 96, so, anyway, so that was B. Tier.

One was: our team was not the team ever other people would have picked, including me. Second one was: I was told repeatedly throughout almost the entire time I was making Fallout, that, and even by people above me, that they couldn't wait for Fallout to ship so they could put me on something worthwhile, and that was because they didn't think, when we were gerps, derps was a very small, narrow, uh, what do they call It was a um, very narrow Focus compared to like d, and that's what they wanted me on. Several people were like, oh, we're going to put you on DND as soon as um Fallout ships. In fact, Fallout almost got canceled when we got, when interplay got, the d license, because they figured: why make this RPG that isn't DND if we have the d license, which some people call the license to print money? I had to convince I and I did it directly to Fargo. I appealed to Fargo not to cancel it I said, look, this is a post-apocalyptic, it's not going to interfere with fantasy d games. RPG players buy a lot of uh RPGs all the time. I didn't know if that was true, but I said it I did it, um, and actually, to be honest, I can.

That's these are other videos too. That wasn't the only time. Fall was almost canceled, there were three. Many people on the team know about two. They don't know about the third one, but um. So that wasn't the only time we almost canceled. But I mean, if we were an eight-tier project, I don't think there would have been multiple cancellation attempts.

The other thing was when I looked at the other d games being made like descent to undermountain, I was concerned. I I saw some off design choices being made. I saw team members that fought with each other. I mean, yeah, on Fallout we discussed things, but these people actually thought it was weird. They were not making the same game, they were at Cross purposes. So that was. That was a strange thing to Aspire to be on a team like that. So that was the second thing, so we had team members and then our I was told, hey, just finish this up so we can put you and every all these people on something good.

The other thing was we I didn't meet with a lot of people. Um, until those last few months, which is unusual, I didn't hear from marketing, um, no one ever asked me to do interviews. We didn't have press coming by if this was an eight-tier game, that.

Would have happened, instead, what happened was, after Fargo played it and loved it, suddenly marketing's like: hey, what kind of ads you want? We should get together, we should talk and I'm like we ship in a few months. I only remember one ad coming out for Fallout. I've been told there were two. Okay, so I'm off by a factor of double, but there weren't many reviews or previews. I should say basically there wasn't a lot of knowledge. And I hear a lot of stories about people wandering into a game store and seeing the box and flipping it open because we had that neat hinged lid and that's how they learned about Fallout again.

I don't think that would have happened if we were an A-list game. But probably the most important thing is there was absolutely no SQL plan for Fallout. It was always a one-off game there.

Was no discussion, there was no. We didn't put things in the game to make it easy to leverage a sequel. We didn't even think about a sequel until after those two events happened.

QA started playing it all the time and Fargo took it home to play and liked it. Suddenly, people wanted to talk about a sequel and I was way too busy. I mean, we were working. We had already been working 12 and 14 hour days.

I didn't have enough time to think about a sequel. So what we did was I said: look, maybe I want to do something else after this, because I'm not a big sequel person and after three and a half years I think I might want to work on something else. So they spun up another team to do it.

Fergus picked the designer and I wanted my assistant producer, Fred, to be. The producer on it. In fact — and this is a little side story but I'm going to say it — I house sat for someone else on the team over the July 4th weekend in 97 and I did the team's reviews, because they were. We did the mid-year and I did Fred's review, filled out all the paperwork. The last line on it was recommended promotion to producer on Fallout 2 and I turned all that in. Now, keep in mind, I left, he didn't get processed and I left shortly into 98. I found out years later that Fred was told I never turned in the paperwork. So, Fred, if you're listening, I turned in that paperwork and recommended your promotion to be the producer in Fallout 2..

Sorry it didn't happen and if anybody told you I didn't do it, that's not true but anyway. So there was a whole second team working on. It and we were trying to get the first game out. What happened was, um, the game shipped. Fallout shipped.

It got good reviews. It didn't necessarily get great sales, but it had really good reviews and some of them were like it's revitalizing the RPG genre and we were all: that's really awesome.

I started working on something else. Oddly I — it's the one thing I can't find my notes for I don't know what I was working on, but I was working on something else and that's when — not Fergus, but Brian Fargo — ordered me back on Fallout 2.. So I'll talk about that tomorrow, but I just wanted to get all this down so you understand kind of the context of Fallout being beat here and what it was like kind of. At the end there was another team working on Fallout 2.

I was exhausted. I was ready to do something else for most of this creation. I was told it wasn't worthwhile and suddenly at the end it was worthwhile. So it's weird to believe in something all the time that other people only believe right at the end. But that is also something that seems to happen in the game industry.

People are reticent to jump on something unless they think it's a sure thing. No one wants to jump on a game that bombs like. I still love tempo of ellental evil. I don't hear a lot of people who worked on it saying that was their favorite game or whatever. I loved it, but we, after Fallout, shipped suddenly it was everybody's favorite game ever, including some people I had never really seen before. So anyway, that's kind of the context of understanding what making Fallout was like. And tomorrow, I'll talk about Fallout 2..
