+++
title = "Stories I Won’t Tell"
date = "2026-02-13"
id = "6O6X1h0mx-0"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life"]
summary = "There are stories I won't tell on this channel. Here's why."
references = ["6TtR8YjmdnA", "mFZSt3TaE7Q", "WY79buu4-FA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about stories I won't tell on this channel.

Let me get into why Figured this is a kind of funnish Friday video. First of all, about half of my channel's content comes from questions that you guys ask. And you guys ask really good questions about games and also about other things like "Hey Tim, why do you think we haven't detected a magnetic monopole" Or "Hey Tim, how did you develop your keen eye for fashion". However, I've had to talk about questions that I can't or won't answer. I made an entire video about comments that I skip.

Uh, some of them had to do with, like people ask me to show code some from some of my games and that would violate the NDA. That's part of the contract. They asked questions I didn't know. The answer to Really common ones about that were: "Why did Why was this particular thing designed in Bloodlines". And I wasn't even on Bloodlines for the first 2 years. So not.

Only do I not know who designed it, I've no idea why. Or they ask about methodologies. I don't use Like "Hey Tim, talk about Agile". I don't use that. I've also get a lot of questions about indie games. I don't make indie games.

I got so many questions asking me to review games Or more way, more commonly, just give your thoughts, which, even if that person innocently just wants my thoughts, it will be turned into a review. It'll be picked up from some site, twisted into being a review of the game and you know, spelled out on the net. So I have a whole video just on that, on why I don't review games, and I stand by all that. But the other half of my channel comes from me telling stories, my own experiences in the game industry, good and bad, mostly good, but occasionally bad. However, as I've been doing this more and more, I've noticed — I because I write down ideas for stories I want to tell And occasionally I move them into a category of no, I'm not going to tell this story. There are enough stories there in the I'm not going to talk about this category — that I decided to talk about them in a meta way, which is: here are four types of stories you will not hear me say on this channel. The first one is stories that aren't mine.

I've had a lot of people come to me and say: "Hey, I love your channel. This happened to me at this other company that you never worked at, with people you've never worked with". I've even had people who came to me who worked with me on projects and said, "You know, that day you were out, this happened" Or "I was in a meeting that you weren't and this happened". And they want me to tell those stories here And I I can't. I won't. One just pure objective thing is: if you guys had any questions, I wouldn't be able to answer them. If you had, if you want to know, "Hey, Tim, was that meeting in the winter or the summer? Did that happen before this other meeting"?

I, I don't know. I do not know.

People have even given me permission. They're like: "Go, ahead and tell them, Tell the story. Maybe I'll answer any questions people have in the comments". And I've had to stop people on that because I have a video about why I don't do chats on this channel anymore. I'll link that below too, for lots of reasons I stopped bringing people on to give chats. But one of them is when I guys tell you: guys a story, I have stuff to back it up. I have emails, I have notes that I took right after the meeting that are time stamped. The file was time stamped right after the meeting. I've got ways of — I don't want to say proving, but I have ways of supporting what I'm saying in my stories — Most of these other people don't. It's just "Oh yeah, I remember this thing from 20 years ago and I want, I want you to tell, it on your channel".

So I don't do that. I don't tell other people's stories. Those are stories for them to tell, not for me. A second type of story I don't tell are bad stories that have been resolved to my and the other person's satisfaction. In other words, I've told some bad stories on here because I want you — I I don't want to whitewash.

The game industry — I want you guys to know there's some bad stuff that happens in the game industry. But I, I think I've told enough of those. There are other stories — that of bad things that have happened to me or with me — that the other people have contacted me, sometimes right after it or sometimes much later, and a few times after this channel started I've had people come: "You're going to tell this story, aren't you", but they apologized for what they did or said and I believe them. And the reason I believe them is they could show me decades of not behaving that way anymore And I'm like "Okay, I believe you". So those bad stories, I'm not going to repeat them here. I think the person involved or the people involved are better now.

A third type is: I have very, very personal stories of other people. And I don't mean personal, my own personal issues I'm talking about. People have had issues in the game industry and have come to me in confidence and I've helped them As much as I think many of you would benefit from hearing those stories. So you don't feel alone and you feel like there are allies out there and you feel like the these issues can and have been addressed in the past.

First off, I don't think the people I helped would want me to tell those stories. If anybody knew who they were or could identify from them, from the story They came to me privately. We handled it privately. It's not my place to make that story public here, even though I was involved. Also, those stories, if enough of those stories — it starts to sound like virtual virtue, signaling Like "Look how great I am".

Most of it is, just, and I've mentioned this before. I have this trigger, when people are being unfair to someone, I just get triggered, especially if it's someone on my team, more so than if it happens to me. I get triggered by watching people be unfair to other people that I feel responsible for. But it would sound like virtue sig — virtue signaling if I just told you story after story like "I helped this guy and then I did this awesome thing". So I just don't tell those stories And I figure again, if those people want those stories told, they can tell them. And then the last fourth type of story I don't tell here are really complicated ones. I have a lot of stories that I've written down and then I looked at them like "Wow, that is a really complicated story with lots of branches and people involved".

And I know I use this. Word a lot and I've been trying not to use it lately — but nuance, In other words, to understand the story, which is very complicated, you would have to understand some complicated events, some complicated causes. Sometimes something simple has a really complicated cause, and I've learned that some people on here cannot understand that. And no matter how carefully I tell a story, people get the wrong message and then they repeat the wrong message and occasionally I see a headline in a forum or even a website with the wrong message in the headline, which is not at all what I said in the video, which is one reason I love having these videos, because I've seen people on some of those places go: "I went and watched the video of Tim talking and that is not what he said and it's not what he meant". So because of that, there are some really complicated stories that I would love to tell because they have a really good message, but they are so complicated, so nuanced that I just don't think I could do it I don't think I could pull it off. So those are some other stories that I'm just not telling here. So I wanted to do this to basically say: "Hey, sometimes you guys ask questions in the comments and I don't say anything. I skip them", if you think I'm skipping you for a reason, go watch my video on questions I can't or won't answer, or why I don't review games or give my thoughts on games. And then, if you think I'm not telling enough stories with other on behalf of other people, watch the chats and interviews, video. But in the future there are stories I'm not going to talk about here, especially stories that didn't happen to me, or I'm not the main character, or they're just simply too complicated to get across. Be sure that my message will get across with my very simple storytelling techniques. Anyway, I just wanted to put that out there so I can come, I can direct people to this video when they ask for something and I'm like: "Yeah, I'm not going to tell that story".
