+++
title = "Running Meetings"
date = "2026-01-05"
id = "7vBUHmSm7vA"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Management"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I'm going to talk about running meetings, something I know you all love."
references = ["int5XZHsgiU", "9lYuzefVvMA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I'm going to talk about running meetings, something I know you all love.

Everyone's always telling me, Tim, I love meetings, Talk more about them. Actually, I know you don't like meetings, but I was having lunch with a friend of mine who's also in the game industry, in a very different role than I have. And I mentioned to her that last week I was in a meeting and I got called out for not talking at all. We got to the end of the meeting — It was almost an hour long — and somebody said: "Well, Tim, you've been quiet, You haven't said anything. What do you think", and I even said my answer was: "Well, this is the first time I've been to this meeting that you guys have been having for a few months now. I just wanted to listen".

She said she had the opposite experience: where she was in a meeting that someone else was running, Her boss was running it, and she knew her boss and several people on the team had a specific problem that was occurring. But they were getting near the end of the meeting and no one had brought it up. So she was like I guess I need to talk about this because she didn't want it to go another week because it was getting worse every week. And we were talking about how people don't like meetings And I know you guys have said meetings are terrible and they're dumb, and I have a whole video on why I think conversation is important and I'll link it below. And if you feel like meetings are dumb, go leave comments in that one, because I'm just going to assume here, going forward, that meetings are important because they are Now.

Can they be wrongly used? Yes, Can they be. Can they occur too frequently? Yes, Every tool can be wrongly used and used too much. So meetings. Are no different in that regard, but I had do have another video on brainstorming meetings, and that's a very specific kind of meeting with specific kind of rules and how it should be run. So I have a video on that. Right now I just want to talk about general meetings, Meetings where you call some people together to talk about something And if you plan to become a director or lead in any role, these kind of meetings are going to be expected of You will eventually be called upon to run these. So that's why I wanted to give this, because some of you are like "No, I'm never going to run those" And I'm like "Okay, you're going to be a very unusual lead and possibly a very ineffectual lead".

But let's talk about meeting types. I think there are three big kinds of meeting types that I have in the game industry. There are different types, but they also correlate with the size. The first one is informational meetings. These are usually big group meetings like the entire team or maybe even the entire company, which means these meetings sometimes can have a 100, 200, a thousand people in them. Sometimes they're in person and we'd have them in big, you know, auditoriums. Um, at Interplay We used to go outside so everybody would be on the first and second floor balconies and somebody would be talking to us from the first floor.

Now it's all done in Teams or Zoom or something like that. But these big meetings are usually because some information has to be given to the team and they want to do it all at once. You know, hey, we just shipped this game, or hey, the reviews are coming in, or hey, we kicked off a new project or whatever. Whatever you want the whole team to hear and you want to hear it from the same person at the same time. These meetings tend to be very short and very focused. There is discussion, but it's usually relegated to a Q&A at the end of the information block. Contrast this with directional meetings, which are smaller groups, usually run by a director, could be a lead, sometimes senior, and it involves the director talking to the producers or the leads. And this tends to be a longer meeting And, again, information tends to be flowing down. But there's a lot more questions being answered during the meeting because these are all your leads And you're usually telling them stuff — And this is why I call it directional — Usually saying: "Hey, you know, in this game we're really trying to, you know, let the player have a lot of agency. So I'm starting to know railroading, and level design or railroading and dialogues. We've got to stay on f, we got to stay on track Focus". It's not something you're not pulling one person out and going, "You're doing something in or someone's doing something wrong in your, group".

It's a director saying, "Hey, I see things not going the direction I want them to go, the direction that our pillars imply we should go". Those are, those tend to happen every week or two. Um, and then there's actionable meetings. These are sometimes called strike team meetings. This is the smallest group I've seen, a strike team of two people you could have. In general, strike teams are like five to seven people. It's whatever fits comfortably in a small conference room. It's very focused.

Conf strike teams might meet two or three times a week if they need to, because they're usually implementing a particular feature like inventory might. Be a strike team, or it might be a small area on a map, like we're doing this dungeon, or we're doing this town, and there's a strike team to do it. So it's a mix of a programmer, an artist, a level designer, a narrative designer, Sound will come to strike teams and they all, they're all working on just this one particular narrow feature in the game. They need to have these meetings because they all need to be on the same page constantly. The slightest divergence because they're working so quickly and so specifically.

Anybody goes off and does something for a week or two and then comes back that may be a week or two lost. For all of these meetings, all of them, whether it's a giantformational meeting or a directional meeting or an action meeting, you should have an agenda. Whoever's running it should have an agenda. And I mean that. I mean have a list of things you want to go over in that meeting. If you don't have it, many people in the group are going to say, "God, you were just rambling". But if you do have it, still expect some people in the group to go: "That was a very controlling meeting.

You, know, we were doing good stuff and you were. We were doing good stuff and you, we started talking about this and you moved us over here".

And that's because, if, you have to choose between being called rambling and controlling, choose controlling. Rambling is always bad, so have a list of things you want to go over. That's how I do these videos. I have a list of topics I want to make sure I cover. You don't have to have a script. You don't have to write down everything you want to say to people in a meeting, but you should have an idea of the topics you're going to cover. That alone will get you through 90% of any of the informational or directional meetings and a lot of the action meetings. So now I want to talk more in detail about action meetings and strike teams, or whatever your, company — calls it, because I think there are things you need to do in that that you may not do in the bigger meetings. The first one is: if you see something you don't like, say something.

Don't let things slide for weeks or months. You don't even have to say that's wrong. I hate it. This is stupid, Which, judging from the comments, many of you tend to do. Instead, the best way I found to handle this is just go.

I don't understand this dialogue. I don't understand this character. I don't understand. This creature, I don't understand this city layout and then explain what's causing an issue for you Like, be specific.

That's what these actionable meetings are for. I've heard a phrase — compliment publicly, critique privately — which I think doesn't extend to this. I mean, you can critique how something's coming together in an action meeting. But I think what they mean by that is, if you really like some particular person's work, call them out in an action meeting or even a information or directional meeting. But if you're having specific problems with somebody, that's where you sit down with them privately and go: "Look, you're not doing this, or you're not doing this well, or you're not doing this right, or you're not doing this on time". However, you still should address things, especially in action meetings, that you don't want people to do or that you don't want to have done.

Moving forward, Otherwise you end up wasting so much time. I've seen people, out of wanting to be kind or pleasant, let a game go off the rails and burn — all because they didn't want to be unkind to someone. And I'm like, okay, that's going too far, That's the pendulum swinging too far in the other direction. If you see something going in that isn't right, or even if you see a feature going in that isn't fun, you need to say something, because if you wait 6 months, you just burn six months of time and money. You should especially call out if work was done incorrectly early on, because course correction is easier early, or if work is entirely missing. And I know some people are like: "Well, no, you shouldn't call it out, It shouldn't be done".

Here's the problem, Especially in small meetings like that, because you're so focused everybody. Probably can tell, like, let's say, some creature was supposed to be done and then you have the weekly meeting and you don't even bring it up and it's not in the game. Those people are going to be really worried.

Is Tim not noticing this creature isn't done? Is something going on that we should know about? Just saying "Hey, this creature wasn't finished this week. Um, stuff got behind on the creature queue.

We're aware of it. We're going to have the creature done next week" and then you can move on. But just ignoring it makes people nervous and you almost always know they're going to come up with some worse idea in their head of what's going on. The other thing that's cool for small, actionable meetings is this is the time where people ask questions a lot, often during the meeting, and you should encourage that. You should even ask people, for feedback, like what happened in that meeting I was in, because if people come to these meetings regularly — the small, actionable meetings — and they never talk, why are they there? And this is something I said in the brainstorm meeting: If you're coming to a small strike team meeting and you never talk or ask questions or are discussing what you got done, you don't need to be there. You could be sent a video of the meeting, You could be sent a summary of the meeting and that would let less people would be at the meeting, because the more people are at the meeting, the more chance it derails, the more p talk past each other. That can happen. You want the meeting to be small and tight as possible. So if you have people coming who never talk, they don't need to be at those meetings. They can still be at.

The other meetings, because usually it's not as back and forth as the strike teams are. But the other thing, the last thing I want to talk about, is a lot of people don't want to run these meetings. Forget the people who don't like meetings, which I know is a lot of you. Some of them don't want to run these meetings And I will tell you the ones who often very voseiferously, want to run meetings. Those are the ones you don't want running meetings. Those are the scary people.

It's like in politics. The people who want to run are frequently the people you don't want running. And then you see someone you're like: why aren't you running? I don't want to do that, but you'd be good at that.

The best directors I've ever worked with, and the best leads for that matter, have been people who are very passionate but reluctant. To be in those positions. Those are the best people to get, because those are the people you know who aren't going to let the power go to their head, go crazy, um, or just try to always prove themselves right, because they don't even necessarily want to be in that role but they're good at that role. Those are the people you want, people who are good at a role that they don't necessarily demand that they be in. Those are good people to run meetings to. In fact, I often find producers run meetings very well because they're really good at keeping lists and having an agenda and keeping on tab of what everyone's going on and asking tough questions. So frequently, having a producer or an assistant producer run a strike team meeting is a good way to go. But anyway, I did want to talk about this because I think a lot of you think meetings shouldn't happen and I think that I can think of projects that have derailed because of that attitude. So I think meetings should be run, but they should be run well, and I hope this gives you an idea of how to do that.
