+++
title = "Arcanum Criticals"
date = "2023-07-08"
id = "8g0aLMYxl4A"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Combat Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone, this is Tim. Today I want to talk about how criticals work in Arcanum."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone, this is Tim. Today I want to talk about how criticals work in Arcanum.

Sounds like a simple question. I completely went down the rabbit hole in arcanum's code. I think I mentioned once that Arcanum was very much our everything in the kitchen sink game, and I think every single idea that anyone ever had about criticals — whether it was combat or not, whether it was success or failure — went into Arcanum. So if this is something that interests you keep listening, because I have an awful lot of stuff to go over.

Okay, so let's talk first about when you use a skill, any skill, in Arcanum, what's the chance it succeeds? Okay, that is based on your skill level, so the more ranks you have, the more chance it has to succeed. Training also affects it and you have to read: every skill has different um effects specifically to that skill. For any skill, though, uh, if it's used at anything at range, if it can be especially like you know, arranged weapon or something you're throwing, um, that range is adjusted by, uh, the users, I'm gonna say attacker and victim, or attacker and Target, um the attacker's perception it, so that decreases penalties for range. Obstacles can decrease your chance of success, like if you're trying to shoot someone the other side of a bush or a non-solid fence or something.

They can be marked that way. Those props are marked a certain way. Anybody think of something you can see through the but partially blocks your vision, lighting. Lighting helps every skill. Good lighting helps every skill and decreases every skill except sneak, which it does the reverse to. So bright lighting it's harder to sneak in, it's easier to sneak when it's dark. Similarly, some creatures are marked as having night vision, so they see better when it's dimmer and they see worse when it's bright.

For, use of their skills, um, also the awareness of the attack can — or the use, I should say can — affect the skill. For example, if you're using stealth and the person's unaware of you, that increases your chance of success. Sleeping people get a plus 30 across the board of any skill being used on them.

Hey, I looked that one up and I'm like: okay. Also, if you're using a combat skill, then if your strength is below the weapons minimum strength requirement, penalties if the user of the skill is blind or is crippled in either arm. That reduces the skills chance of success. For some skills like Dodge, even having crippled legs reduces your chance of success. Now there are bonuses if the target's paralyzed or stunned or prone or, as I mentioned, sleeping. They're very specific bonuses and penalties that are like situational, dependent, depending on the skill.

For example, if you're sneaking and for some reason you have silence, either a spell, or you have move silent boots or something, you get a bonus. Um, if you're trying to pick a lock on a container or door, those locks have penalties that apply to your skill because it's a hard lock, um. Finally, if you try to use a magic item or spell on a tech Target, or vice versa, a tech skill or item on a magic Target, that will introduce a flat chance to fail, so it's independent of your skill. Before the game even tries your skill, it'll go. I'm gonna check see if you failed because of that whole Magic versus Tech dichotomy in the game.

Okay, so now let's assume the role happened. What is the chance that that role is going to be a critical success? Well, it has to be a success. First of all.

The chance it will become critical is proportional to the skill. The better your skill, after all those penalties and bonuses I just mentioned, the better you're going to have a chance of getting a critical success. Some magic items increase the chance that they're user gets a critical success. Sometimes it's a magic weapon increasing your chance of getting a critical success on a hit, but sometimes it can just be I'm wearing a hat. I get more critical successes with any of my skills when I wear this hat. Some situations increase the chance of a critical success.

For example, if you're a, if you have Master Level Training in backstabbing — um, I'm sorry, if you have Master, everyone sneak and you backstab. Way better chance of getting a critical success. Um, some status effects increase in. Uh, decreased chances of critical successes, um.

Some skills, some combat skills, um, I'm sorry, actually all combat skills. If you do a card shot, remember that lowered your chance of actually getting a hit. But that same proportion that it lowered the chance of getting hit increases the chance if you do hit. That becomes critical.

That's the trade-off, the reason you try for the tricky Cod shots. Fake points can just give the player an automatic critical success in whatever they picked for the fake point. And then finally, the chance of getting a critical success can, with all those adjustments I just mentioned, can drop below zero or go above 100. They drop below zero, it's not gonna happen. If it goes above 100, it always happens.

Now let's compare the what I just said to the chance of getting a critical failure if you fail. So the chance of the critical failure is inversely proportional to the scale that was calculated with all the bonuses and penalties — the chance for critical failure goes up more if, it's a CR, if you're doing an attack and the weapon is damaged, some magic items increase the chance of critical failure again. If it's a magic weapon, geez uh, it can increase the chance of your critical failure if you fail. Or can just be an item that you're wearing and it increases the chance of critical failure with skills. Some status effects again can up and raise and lower critical failure chance if tech items are used by someone with a magic aptitude. So you're trying to use one of the tech weapons maybe, and you, your aptitude is positive in the magic Direction, you can have a critical failure with a Chance proportional to the tech power of the item and your magic aptitude. Similarly, if, a Target critically succeeds, at Dodge, that can cause the attacker to critically fail their hit and that goes up with training — the player can also spend fate points to force an enemy to critically fail. If the critical failure of an attack causes a subsequent hit — for example, if on the chart you roll my critical failures, I hit myself or I hit a friend of, those hits are automatically upgraded to criticals Critical Hits on yourself or your friend. And then here's the kicker: the chance to critically fail can go over 100, meaning it will always happen, but it can never, ever, for any reason, drop below two, unless training says you will never critically fail in a, at the skill or in a particular situation, because then it never even called the function to see if critical failure should happen. But if a critical failure is being checked for, it can never. Ever, be less than two percent, which means one in 50 of all failures become critical failures. So finally, what are the effects of a critical hit, a critical success or a critical failure?

First of all, training, like I mentioned, can adjust that so you can have. There are some things that can't happen. If you are highly trained in a skill, some critical success, uh, critical failures are ameliorated, um, some critical successes are always forced, um. I'll give you an example: critical success is very skill dependent. If you heal someone and you get a critical success, you can heal more than one, like crippled limb. If they're a crippled left arm and right arm, you might heal them both.

If you disarm a trap and you get a critical success, you will get parts off that trap, uh, uh, when you're doing a critical, if you have a critical success on an attack, then the effect is based on the creature you're hitting. Creatures can have some creatures can't be critically have a critical success effect. In a certain way it also depends on where you hit. For example, if you hit someone in the head, there's a chance you might knock them unconscious. If you hit them in the arms and legs, there's a chance they're going to that armor leg at. That chance of doing the crippling is adjusted by if they're wearing armor in that location. That armor can have an adjustment to that. So some helmets are like: if you wear this helmet the chance, your chance of getting knocked unconscious by any critical hit to the head is reduced.

Similarly, a critical fail depends on the skill for lock picks. You can get your lock picks jammed in the lock and now only. A key will unjam it, if you're pickpocketing someone, and you are, you critically fail, you get caught. If you're trying to heal someone and you get a critical failure, not only do you not do anything, but you lose extra supplies, because it takes supplies, bandages and stuff to heal someone. And then, similar to critical success, if you fail with a combat skill, with an attack, the failure is determined by the weapon. So some weapons can take damage or break. Some weapons can hit you, some weapons can hit a friend and if it's the range they can check rain, some weapons explode, some weapons get dropped. So it's a, it's a chart that's based on the weapon itself. I think that's everything. I dug through all the code, so that's, I think, a complete list of everything that can happen with critical, successes and failures both inside. And combat and out in Arcanum whoo.
