+++
title = "Being Real"
date = "2026-01-16"
id = "90fSUbPOG1w"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about being real."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about being real.

I just had a friend say that he likes to watch my channel because I'm real And he says, you know, he knows me in real life and that I'm not doing an act for the channel, that I'm just being me telling my stories. And he said he can see it's me, It's that the channel is the same passion and gesticulations, and forgetting the names of people and games and techniques like subsurface scattering — that I do in real life. That's me in real life too, so it was interesting because I at first, when he said this, though, I scratched my head over it because I'm doing a podcast here. Effectively, this is a podcast and that's what everybody does, right. And he went on to explain. He goes "Look.

Many YouTubers and podcasters in general they put on an act when they do their channel. It's a front, It's They either they act in an over-the-top way so that you're really into. It, They are artificially excited or, in many cases, artificially angry because it gets them their clicks". One of the things he pointed out is they dress differently and have a set that they do their show in.

This is my home office. That's a working bookcase that I take my games out of when I play or play tabletop or playing games. And that's where I put my sci-fi novels. And I go to work wearing these clothes. I'm about to leave for work in about 30 minutes And this is what I wear to work. It's. This isn't my job.

Um, they're here a lot of those other YouTubers. They're here because this is their job. This is what they do, you know, and they even have a team of to do editing, which I — you're not going to believe me, but I don't. I do my own editing. Um, very little editing [laughter]. I don't even ever clip anything because I like to do it in one continuous unscripted take.

So you guys kind of get the real stories. And that's why I do This isn't my job. Despite the fact that the my Wikipedia page now calls me a YouTuber, I don't consider that my job. I don't consider that my thing. I consider myself a game developer and it's what I do. It's what I get paid for, and I do this channel because I want you, the person watching this, to know what gamedev is like. And by that I mean that it I'm trying to include best practices. Uh, sometimes for code — I talk about code lightly, because there's a bunch of different ways you can do code — Mostly about design, because there's a lot of different ways you can do design. I'm going to tell you this is what worked for me. Especially for role playing games, but I also talk about production best practices and scheduling and running team meetings and all this.

There's just so many videos. I'm not even going to link anything in, just I'm talking about my entire channel. Also, sorry, art and music. I I don't do that. I don't know what best practices are for you guys.

Maybe you artists and musicians in the game industry need to make a channel. But mostly what I tell on here is stories And that's always been the case. When I taught classes at UCI, University of California, Irvine, in game development, the students called it Tim Kane story hour because it was a two-hour class a week. It was a Tuesday, Thursday class And on Tuesday the professor taught and on Thursday I came in and taught and they said what I did was tell stories about game development. But they really liked Thursday because it was real. It was real stories.

This isn't stuff I made up. This is stuff that really happened And, as you can probably tell, I can probably talk all day about game development And the problem with that is you still won't know what game development is like You, until you do it you won't actually know. Um, that's the whole thing about qualia. You know until you eat an apple. You really don't know what an apple's like. I could tell you what an apple's like all day long but you're not going to know.

But the closest I can get there is if I tell you actual stories of game development, which I do on this channel, things I lived through. I didn't hear about them. It wasn't even that I heard them from another developer. I actually told one of my game developer friends that I wasn't going to tell. His stories on my channel because they didn't happen to me, They happened to him.

I think by doing that's the closest you will ever get to know game development: Not just think you understand what happens, no, and the process, but actually get a feeling for what game development is like without actually doing it. But here's the thing — and I've said this before, I'm going to restate it here, on Being Real, I hope you do it, I hope you decide to become a game developer. That's my whole agenda here, kind of Yes, I love telling my stories and I love, you know, reading the comments and engaging with some of you guys in the comment section. But there's a few of you that are actually going to think you know what I can do this. I mean, if that guy can do it, I can do it. And then a few of those people are going to say: I'm going to try it Tim's way. I'm going to go with his setting story mechanics process. I'm going to make a nonlinear game with multiple quest solutions and multiple ending support and lots of support for a broad, different class of PC builds and not a predefined character. I'm going to try it that way and I'm going to be like: great, that's awesome, because then I get to play your game. That's awesome. That's that, in some ways, that's my whole agenda here. If I can just get a few of you making games for me, I mean, I think a lot of other people will like them, but make them for me, I think that'll be awesome.

And all of this started with being real, not a character, not a caricature or someone stoking outrage of the week which has been happening. Now It's been two and a half years and I don't think a week goes by with someone going: Tim, why aren't you talking about Unity price structure? Or this movie that had this scene, or this game that had a cutscene which no one cares about now? I could list all the things they've asked me to talk about and you're not going to care about, or some of you even go. I don't know what you're talking about. But. I also try not to deliver news or um, pretending I'm not pretending to know what gamedev is. I'm telling you what it's like. I'm not telling other people's stories.

It's, this is about being a real game developer and the real things that happen to real game developers. Now I know some people have gotten frustrated because I don't tell those things. I'm those other things: the news and outrage and all that. They fall away from the channel, and that's okay. It's especially okay for you people who remain. But I know a lot of you don't agree with all of my development methodologies that I present here. And guess what?

That's okay too, because part of this is: as long as you don't fall away, you'll develop your own methodologies, You're come up with your own POV And then you're going to make a unique game because it's unique to You will have created all this yourself. And then I will be very happy because I'm keeping it real, and so are you. So go out there and make Uncle Tim a game.
