+++
title = "Appendix N"
date = "2023-08-31"
id = "90Si9b2JbsY"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["TTRPG", "Dungeons & Dragons"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about appendix, and Josh James 582, asked for my thoughts on appendix n, which is in the DM's guide for advanced Dungeons and Dragons, which lets me show off something I'm super excited about."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about appendix, and Josh James 582, asked for my thoughts on appendix n, which is in the DM's guide for advanced Dungeons and Dragons, which lets me show off something I'm super excited about.

I got Gary gygax to sign this for me at a convention in Los Angeles in 92. And later, when I made Temple volento evil, I asked him if he remembered. He was sweet and said he did. I don't think he really did, but he then said you mentioned Bard's Tale Construction Set, and I was like maybe he did remember.

Anyway, Penn exam wasn't that big, it was the top half of a page at the box at the back of the book. Um, what's interesting, though, about appendix 10 is, like Josh James, that's how I discovered Jack Vance too. I was looking through the list of authors that were in there and I realized I have never read this care. This, author — and I'll say this after it — impressed like 15. Year old me, but 40 years later I'm super impressed with how this man can write It's at a level I will never achieve, even if I studied and practiced and did everything. In fact, the very first, uh, or actually it's a second chapter of the dying Earth, the titular novel, he has a description of Missouri and the magician walking through a garden and I'm just impressed with like.

Here grew trees like feather parasols, trees with transparent trunks threaded with red and yellow veins, trees with foliage like metal foil. Each Leaf a different metal: copper, silver, blue, tantalum, bronze, green iridium. Here blooms like bubbles, tugged gently upward from glazed green leaves, their shrub: 4 000 pipe-shaped blossoms, each whistling softly to make the music of ancient earth right.

That's so evocative and so nothing that I would ever be able to write. So I was hooked on bands. I also discovered, uh saberhagen and I — this is my old book that covers coming off of Empire of the East, amazing book. If you ever uh read it, I won't give anything away, but if you read it you know why I love certain genre tropes interestingly, I appendix and I already knew about Lovecraft and Robert E Howard and Roger zelazny, so I was happy to see that d?

D was inspired by them. I really, really tried to get into fafford in the gray Mouser, the stories written by Fritz Lieber. I tried really hard. I liked them but I never loved them. I always thought they felt like Howard Conan pastiches. I I don't know if they are, I just I just couldn't get into them.

Interestingly, I had a friend who loved Michael morcox Elric Saga. Again, it just wasn't for me. He was very unlikable, I thought, as a main character — not that you always have to like a main character, but he didn't. There weren't a lot of hooks in that character for me to like. So I get why people love that story. It's, well written.

The main character is flawed. So you would think I would like something like that. I just I didn't get into it. Um, appendix, and though that was me reading it in the early 80s, in the early 90s, I did something different.

I've always read science fiction novels. I came across a listing of — I think it was a 92 of the books that had won a Hugo and I loved the Hyperion books by Dan Simmons. I love the uplift books by Werner venge. So I'm looking at this Hugo list and I realized I've never read anything by like Lois McMaster boujold and she had all that for Coke vorcos again, Saga barriar and all those books. I read all of the ones that won Hugo and a lot of it didn't. Um, that's what I loved about the Hugo winners: it often inspired me to read more from the author that won a Hugo, even though those books didn't Winnie Hugo.

Also. This is all before the sad puppy stuff, so I'm not going to get into that.

But even at the time I like the hugos better than the nebula, the Hugo's rewarded based on fan votes where the nebula was awarded, based on, I think, editors. And what I found was — it happened occasionally in the Hugo, but more in the nebular nebula — a book would win not because it was a good book, but because you could tell they felt bad that they hadn't given an award to that author, so they decided to give the award. For whatever book he had written that year, and I I didn't like that, certainly. Sometimes nebula books won that were not anywhere close to what that author had written as their best work, and some of their previous work was way better. So I'm just like sorry, who goes.

The funny thing about this was this was in, this is after I started interplay, so I would often read these books in my lunch hour. I mentioned it to people what I was reading. Chris Taylor, who eventually became the lead designer in Fallout, he wanted to read them too, and so we'd often trade books, so we didn't have to buy all of them ourselves, and Chris Taylor can speed read, which is totally unfair because I would give him a book and he'd hand it back to me the next day and go. That was great and I'm like, and we talk about it now. One thing I discovered — I don't know if it was from speed reading or just the way people's memory work, but we could talk about it and he had great recall of the whole novel asked him about it about two or three months later. He doesn't remember as many of the details. I asked him a year later. He had forgotten a lot of details. I don't know if that's because of the speed reading or just the book made more of an impression on me than it did on him, but I did realize that when we were reading these books together I had to discuss it with them soon after we read them, but he blazed through it. He got way ahead of me, um, so he had to wait on his side. He had to wait for me to catch up, which I was lucky if I could read one of those books in a week. So he had to wait sometimes months to talk about a book. He would read a book and come in the next day.

That was so good. You should put it list next on your list. And I was trying to read through them in order. I don't know why I did that, because for appendix N, I did not read through them in order: um, but I just tried to do that for who goes oddly, and people have asked about all the books behind me.

Um, this is a tiny fraction, not because they're not unboxed. I, I went through and these are almost all my books unboxed. But in 2006 I moved out of my house in someone, and I didn't want to store a lot of things, so I gave away a lot of books. And then again in 2020, when I moved up here, I had a lot of books and so I ended up giving away a lot more.

Um, mainly, I'd take them in to obsidian and put them on the free table and they would all be gone in a day. Some of them that were so old or very specific. I took to a used bookstore up in Orange, California, and they bought some and some they didn't buy, and then the rest I again just tried to give away. So what's interesting is these books that I have, for me to still have a book like this? If I'm keeping Empire of the East, which is I've had this since the 80s — this represents a book I absolutely love and I highly recommend. Same thing with the Jack fans: I bought the complete dying Earth. Uh collection and hardback because I love Jack Vance so much.

He's inspirational to me and aspirational, but I know I can never write as good as he can. And then of course I kept all my d books. In fact I have a shelf of all d books from editions one through five except two, and I have an entire shelf of nothing but judges go modules. I have almost all of the judges go modules that ever came out, so I'm super happy with that. But anyway, back to appendix ad: um.

I loved that an RPG book would include a bibliography like that. Like here are things that inspired me to make this game, because when I read those books of course you can see where magic comes from in d It's very much fancy in because advances books you could — they could only memorize a few. Spells and once they cast them they were out of their memory and they had to memorize them again.

Um, come on next. Dungeons or dragons. That's exactly where it's stolen some of the names: Prismatic spray, um, uh. Gosh, there were so many of them that obviously came from Jack fans's novels. If you read them you're gonna recognize a lot of d spells being cast. I love that. I loved that he picked, pick and choose a lot of elements from different things. There's Howard stuff in d There's lovecraftian things in D the Mind flares, um, the aboleths — those are all very love crafting.

I think that, uh, like me, guy gax was very much a product of his times. So these are all books he read when he was younger and he put him in his game. When you play my games, you will. See a lot of things from books I've read in my games and, I think, appendix n. If you've never read sci-fi and fantasy from the 30s through the 70s, I highly recommend that you go through appendix n in the D D book. You can even find it online. You don't have to find an old DM's guide and go through some of those stories.

They're a little dated, um. Sometimes the ideas are bigger than the characters, meaning their characters will be a little cardboard, but I still recommend that you read them to see where D D came from, which will give you a good idea. So if you know where it came from and you know where it is now, you have a good idea of where it may go. I've always been a big fan of sort of archaeological game studying, although I realize my games are now becoming. Part of people's archaeological game studies, so make of that what you will. Um, I'm becoming a fossil, but I'm proud of what I buried, okay, have fun.
