+++
title = "Action Points, Part 2"
date = "2025-06-18"
id = "9wIx8zd8qvA"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Balance", "Combat Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about action points, part two."
references = ["ay6Ue5fAqxQ"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about action points, part two.

I did a video a few weeks ago on action points, Generated a lot of really good discussion in the comment section, including this comment from Matamwit who asked: I love this topic. I would like to ask what everyone thinks about, and then there's five topics. What One?

What advantages and disadvantages are there if we separate, split movement points and action points in two separate pools? Number two: what do you think about barring action points from the next turn? Three: what about allowing one character to sacrifice their own points for another party member to take action with? Four: what do you think about skills and spells that require more action points than you currently have available and the character has to spend multiple turns if they want to perform the action? This is a good opportunity to lock more powerful skills behind multiple turn blocks and force opponents to focus the character that is preparing a bigger scout — uh, bigger spell. And number five: higher action point pools which allow for perks and items that increase the pool by a small amount without impacting game balance.

All such good questions, so let's walk through those, shall we? So?

The first one: splitting your action points into two pools, one for move and one for action. I think this is a cool idea. Um, we kind of did it in temple, but that's just because that's how D&D handled it. There was one pull and it was you could do walk so far for your move and then you could do an action. But if you chose not to move at all, then you could do two actions. But I like the idea of two completely separate pools for a lot of reasons. First of all, you can have perks that just are just for one pull. So you could have a, perk saying like speedy or like a runner, which increases your move points. That doesn't mean runners can attack more often or do anything else. They can't pick locks, They can't pull things out of their inventory, They just move more on their turn. And that's a great way of separating them. And then, additionally, you can have perks that just affect action stuff. If you could say: you know, a this reduces by one the use of any action point for firing a weapon, for using a weapon — melee or action. Or you maybe even separate ranged and melee.

What's cool about that is because it's referring strictly to the action pool. It doesn't mean your character can't move any less, It just means you know or move anymore. They're just a little faster at moving, at using their weapons.

Additionally, you can flip this, now penalties make way more sense because you have two pools, For example a crippled. Leg reduces your action point pool or, conversely, makes walking cost more. Um movement points. Crippled arms go out, come out of the action pool You, once you have a crippled arm, maybe it cost you an extra one or extra two to use a weapon or to do any kind of manipulation in the world, like pick a lock or pick something up. I like this because it makes more sense that a crippled arm and a crippled leg would have wildly different effects in a pointbased combat system And there's also tons of overlap you could have with different mechanics.

If you already have fatigue in your game, maybe you're using fatigue to determine the difference between walking and running. Like, maybe walking and running both um burn a movement po point, but run moves you two for every one. But then you have fatigue and when fatigue runs out you're out. Of it, maybe you can have things like you know, uh, fatigue and your action point pool. When you run out of your fatigue your movement points all cost double. Maybe you can have things like weapon sway. So if you're fatigued your weapon sway is increased and maybe you can spend an extra action point to reduce it.

So you can see all these things. You can now have mechanics you may already have in your game and suddenly they interact with these two separate pools in much more specific and less abstract ways. Now there is a downside, I think, to doing this, which is you've now made the action pulls more complex, because you have a movement pull and an action pull. And sometimes it may be unclear which one it's supposed to come from.

If I do a running kick, if I have a jump kick, is that an action? Or a movement, or is it both? Do you have, do you now have some, things the player can choose, that need to pull from both poles? What happens if you're missing just one of them and not the other? What happens if you're u missing both?

It can get very confusing, or the rules can get very complex. And I'm not even talking about the people who just misunderstand. They get a perk and go, "Oh yay, I got extra action points. Oh no, This one's for movement points. You should have read that perk description a little better". So you're going to have that kind of disadvantage And then borrowing action points — I don't know if I like borrowing from future — turns. Um, I would say if I did this, I would limit it. First of all, I would make it a perk.

You don't start off being able to do this. You maybe you get a perk saying you can do, you can use so many extra action points in a round, but then your next turn you don't. You get, you lose those points, or maybe you lose double those points, Something that makes it like if you're going to borrow, you're going to have to borrow with interest. Also, I would limit its use, either the number of times you can do it in a particular combat or the total amount you could ever borrow, because it could get ridiculous if people are like I'm going to borrow 100 action points from my next three turns and just run around the battlefield in my turn and kill everybody. It's definitely something you have to put a limit on, but I like it. But my design hackles raised a little bit and I'm like I see lots of ways this could. Be abused, so borrowing action points from future turns, experiment with it but expect to have some issues. And then the third one, which is letting one of your characters in the party donate move points or action points to another character.

I don't like this one. I don't like it for a lot of reasons. One, it doesn't make as much sense to me if someone, somehow I — can move really fast and that lets one of my other friends move fast, I, I don't see it as much. Um, it also makes me worried that some player characters in the party — if you're a party based game — may be created just to be batteries. In other words, they'd use all their stats and perks to have a bunch of action points just so they can donate them to other people in the group and act as a battery for the good.

Um combat characters. Although, the more I think about this, that is an interesting character design, like making a battery, because he himself is worthless but he donates stuff to other people. Anyway, not sure I like it, but be very careful going this route and think and plan on some players making battery characters. The fourth one: the idea of spreading an action over multiple combat turns so you can accumulate enough points to use a particular high um AP cost ability.

I love that. I think that's a great idea.

Again, it reminds me of the character who just stands there doing nothing and then, turn one goes by, he doesn't move or act. Turn two: he doesn't move or act And then turn three, he bursts into action and does all these crazy things. I love that Um, but also — I think someone even pointed out in the comments — that means if you make a player character who has really low number of action points, you're not cut off from some of the normal but high action point um weapons or abilities. Let's say there's a weapon that needs five action points and you only have three. Well, if there's no roll, if there's no rolling an action over multiple turns, you just can't use that five action point um ability. But if you can roll it, that means you can use it every other turn. And I like that because it's a perfect example of what I love in games, which is you made a choice on making this character and now here are the consequences. But the consequences aren't so okay.

It's cut and dried. Something is impossible for you. It's instead, something is just much harder for you, or you can still do it, but you have to plan for it.

That's what. I love. That's the perfect kind of choice consequence balance I like. And then the fifth one.

I'm not sure what the question was. He was just saying if you have a higher pool, you can give out more increases and can. You can give out more increases and not overbalance things. And that's true. You know, that's something that if you have a 100 point pool, giving a an extra point here and there isn't going to overbalance anything. But if you have a 10point pool, if you do that three or four times, you've just increased their pool by 50%. So yes, I think the advantage of bigger pools is you can give a lot more, a lot more smaller or more frequent increases without necessarily sacrificing balance. And that means you can have more perks that give points. You can have more items that give points. So if you want to make a really speedy character, maybe there's a perk that makes you run faster and there are these boots that make you run faster. It's all these cool things you can do. So I think that was a really good set of topics that Matamwit asked, and I hope you guys have a lot more interesting questions, because I like action points.
