+++
title = "Arcanum Fate Points"
date = "2025-11-03"
id = "_xt6kMhx1GQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Character Systems"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Arcanum Fate Points."
references = ["ETVsAHbTh2c", "bNf601IoBpc"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Arcanum Fate Points.

Yes, I want to talk about a very particular feature in a specific game that's almost 25 years old. But this comes from a question from Beefy NFN. I know what that means. Wait, no, I don't. I have no idea.

Let's continue. Asked: "I'd really like to hear you go into detail about how you balanced Arcanum with fate points. As someone who has never seen gameplay of Arcanum, let alone played it, The idea of fate points is kind of offputting to me as a game mechanic. As a player, I tend to hoard items that are one use and only use them when absolutely necessary, which means I end the game with a bunch of set items. So I'm curious how that applies in Arcanum with Fate Points.

Would love to hear you talk about this" Okay, It's interesting that you want to know about something in a game you've never played. But I like talking about Arcanum. Um, I have a lot of Arcanum videos. In fact, what I'll do below is I will do a link to the entire Arcanum playlist as well as a link to the specific game, Arcanum game development timeline. So if I mention anything in here and you don't know what I'm talking about, you can go look in there. Uh, especially since you've never played the game. One reason I wanted to talk about this is I've never talked about fate points specifically, but it's come up in different videos, but they're entirely mine.

The design was mine, the code's mine, the whole implementation was mine. So, I don't think they were a success, and that's entirely on me, Um, but I can tell you where they came from, what my intent with them was, what issues I think they had in the game and maybe how I'd fix them today if I were to redo Arcanum, so the origin of Fate Points is very specific. Um, I used to play a tabletop role playing game called Tor. I mentioned it in my influential tabletop role playing game video, which I'll link below. In fact, I think the thumbnail is me holding up a Torque box. Torque was full of really interesting features, especially as someone who played a lot of D and D and um, Gersps and other things. It had a lot of features that I really liked.

One of them was: um, you could continue rolling whenever you rolled a 10 or 20 and just keep adding the dice together. So if you rolled a 10 and then you rolled again, you got a 20, and then you rolled again and you got a five, you just rolled a 35. You just summed up all the rolls. And so I thought that was really cool. But they had this neat idea of something called a possibility point, because your character was special and was called a storm knight. I think you were called a storm knight.

It's been decades And you got a possibility point at certain stages. Uh, the modules would say when to give them out and you could then spend them later. And basically, how you spent them is you just told the GM what happened.

Like anything that's even remotely possible. You could spend a possib possibility point and make it happen. You could say "Hey, I'm fully healed". Or "Hey, I'm going to critically hit with this weapon", or "Hey, this item that's out of charges, it's going to work one more time". And what was fun about that was it was really kind of table turning. Usually players would tell the GM: "I want to do This, and the GM would say what happened. These possibility points, let you tell the GM I'm going to do this and this is what's going to happen.

It was really cool And of course, because it was, you had to spend them on. With the possibility points. It was limited but it really got you out of some jams in that game. And I wanted to do something similar on Arcan.

I'd never seen anything like it in a, uh, computer RPG. So my intent — I think I probably had about three different goals I was trying to do with fate points in Arcanum. The first one was I wanted to reinforce that the player was special. It was kind of a running joke in Arcanum that Virgil thought you were the chosen one, You were the reincarnation of someone, and then you find out that person's not even dead. So there's no way that is going on.

So you're not really special, but fate points were my way of just winking at the player and going, "You're special. I thought this special, You're special". I thought this would increase player agency in the game, because you're getting these fate points which let you do things. For sure You will do this thing and you will succeed at it I thought that would like make the player go, "Okay, I'm going to try these things because even though there's only a tiny percent chance that's going to succeed, I can just fate it into happening". I also thought this would avoid save scumming. But it turns out people save scum all the time.

There's nothing you can really do to prevent it I thought this would help because rather than reload the game 20 or 30 times to finally succeed at pickpocketing a weapon off some NPC, you could just spend a fate point and make it happen. So that was my intent. That's why I added them to the game. I think, though, there were a lot of issues with fate points, specifically in um Arcanum. Probably the biggest one and the worst one was fate points were in no way integral to the game. It was possible to play the whole game without ever using one. In fact, you could even play the whole game without even knowing that they were around.

So they weren't, they weren't that important, and I didn't want to make them a required use, but they didn't feel integral. They didn't feel like part of the game. They felt like they were, they were glued on. And one thing that made it feel that way was the UI was entirely passive. There was a pull down menu that you could see all the different things you could spend a fate point.

On, and most of the effects weren't immediate, like you could pick full heel and that would happen immediately. But most of them were like: the next time you do gambling, the next time you do lockpicking, the next time you do pickpocketing, the next time you hit someone, it's a guaranteed success and the hit would be a critical and all that. That was very passive And also because the effects weren't immediate, players tended to use the immediate one. You know why would you use it on anything other than an immediate full heal? Because saying "I want to get a critical on my next attack roll", That doesn't guarantee anything dies. And getting a success on your next skill roll — well, like I said, people will just save scum to make that happen. But that full heal was something you may not be able to get any other way. So I would go on to say that.

Two other issues with fate points: in the way they were designed it was very unclear to the player when they were going to be provided. The instructions I gave to level and I guess narrative design — we didn't really call each other that, we just all wore different hats — was to give them at major points, which obviously could be the story quests you know, each one being completed. But occasionally on other things as well, where you did something really amazing. Maybe you killed a boss or you killed a unique thing. You could provide a fate point for that. But it was really unclear how the game was going to give them to you And because of that I think a lot of people played the game weren't sure how frequently they were going to get them or how many they were going to get them, which then led to what OP mentioned, which was players would hoard them and never spend them.

So those are all the issues I think fate points had. Looking at those, I have a better idea of what I might do now to make Fate points work better. Um, I'm not even sure I'd include them again. It's like I said, they didn't feel integral to the game. A lot of people played without them, so I'm not sure I'd even include it. But if, I did like, if I was doing a, remake, the first thing I'd do is I'd make very clear the points at which you were going to be awarded a fate point. If I made it very clear that every major story quest ended with a reward, I would not only mark quests as major story quests in the journal, but I would include that fate point as the reward.

It. Would explicitly say you're going to get like 4,000 XP plus one sword and a fate point. So players could know, hey, if I, you know, make my way past this boss, either by killing or talking with them, or if I find this really cool item or I discover the identity of this villain when I finish. When I do that, I'm going to get a fate point. So just knowing that they were coming might make players go "Oh good, I know I'm gonna be getting one". But then I'd probably make them use or lose. Not that they ever go away, but you can bank so many of them and then, once you get past that, you just if, a, fate point can't go into the bank like you can, you can keep up to five and then anything past that maybe you lose, since you know their user lose and you know they're coming up. That might encourage people to use them more. Plus, you could always add things into the game that could possibly increase the number of banked fate points. So maybe you start with three or maybe five bankable fate points and then you get things that increase it. Maybe some of them temporarily increase It's like you can now hold an extra two fate points for the next, you know, five game hours or maybe until you finish the next story quest. And then you're like: well, I know I'm going to get more and these extra ones only last until I finish the major story quest. So people might be encouraged to use them. The other thing I would really do is I'd go look at all the effects and try to balance them to become something people would want to use more frequently, For example.

The full heal. I might replace that and just say to make it like the other ones, it lets your heal skill be critical when you use it. Whatever that means, for whatever level you have it at. Maybe it means you get a health restore. Maybe it means your li, your crippled limbs get healed, Whatever, a critical heal means for the heal skill, that's what it does.

I'd also make the UI better, because I think that drop-down menu with it's like: okay, now you've set gambling to be pending for a critical. I treat it more like a power attack is treated. You know, in combat You usually hold a key or you do a different click, you press a different button or something different on the mouse or something different on the controller to do a power attack. The same thing would apply to using a fate point. So maybe it's holding alt and then when you attack, that spends a fate point to make that a critical hit. Or maybe you hold alt while you're picking a lock and that forces a success. You will pick that lock, maybe you hold alt while you're pickpocketing an NPC. It guarantees whatever item you pick, you get it and they don't notice. I think all of that — that making the award points clear, making a bank of them so you know it encourages you to use them — and then balancing what you can do, along with having a way better UI on how to use them — I think all that would make fate points a lot better without changing them dramatically. And I'll say this: I think there's a good idea in here somewhere — It's like the flaw stuff. I think there's a good idea, maybe one of you will figure out a better way to do.

It I just fate points just ever since I played possibility points in Tor and then put fate points into Darcanum. I'm like there's a good idea in there somewhere. Maybe they just need to be implemented a little differently. So maybe you're come up with an idea for that. Anyway, that was a good question, Beefy NFN.
