+++
title = "Branding in The Outer Worlds"
date = "2023-05-17"
id = "a1jFfLCfbqY"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["The Outer Worlds", "Marketing"]
summary = "I talk about how the companies and their products and slogans were created for The Outer Worlds, as well as what were the influences on those creations."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about corporate brands in the The Outer Worlds, which I think ties really nicely into yesterday's video about coming up with names for Fallout.

So, in the The Outer Worlds, what you said — on a very distant colony ruled by a very dystopian group of Corporations. Now, we knew at the very early outset — you know, Leonard and I were working on the setting — we knew we were going to have a lot of Corporations because we knew we wanted that firefly-esque feeling to the setting and this required us to create a large number of companies and their slogans and their products and logos and slogans. When we did this, we had a plan in mind for how we wanted to do it and we also had a lot of influences that we knew we wanted to cover, um. There is one big origin for brands for me, but there's a lot of influences on it too, so I kind of want to talk about that, the other things. That kind of factor in here is we want to talk how hard it is to humor, how Hobbies outside the game industry — which I've already talked about with the Disneyland one Disneyland video — how Hobbies you have will affect your game development. I also want to talk about getting the team all focused and going in One Direction, because there's no way — I mean we weren't going to do all of this. We were going to have other people on the team make companies and products. You know all the logos and everything had to be done.

I wasn't going to do that. I mean, look at this, is awesome, um.

So let's talk about what I think is the big influence, and a sharp-eyed viewer already saw them back here, these boxes, so I brought one down. These are, these were boxes, of wacky pack cards that someone gave me recently. But just so you know, I have been collecting these cards since the 70s, got my collection. I actually — oh, that's really bright. I have my collection still many minutes huge. I have a very big collection, um, and they're all Originals. I mean these are some of these are 50 years old.

Put this down the things that I basically have been collecting since I was a kid. I did it with my brother. We traded cards with Other Kids on the Block. I mean really detailed trades. You know three for one. You know three Commons for a rare, the kind of things kids do now with I don't know what magic the Gathering is. That still a thing, but what I loved about it was I actually love the cards themselves. Each card was a product.

A joke product based on a real product. And I actually have a book that I bought at one point which shows how to do Collections and what all the different cards are and what their values were. But I wanted to show you what my favorite one was, even when I was a kid. Um, my favorite card which I had, it's in here.

It's crust, toothpaste, which of course, is based on Crest, and it said it was garlic flavor. And then I love there's a little slogan on the top that said remember to brush your teeth twice a month. And that's just as a kid. That just got me, um, so I loved that. Um, I love that. That was that humor just kind of infused my some of my ideas for The Outer Worlds, but of course I've often talked to know Simpsons and Futurama. Really infuses that as well, so if you look at some of my favorites, which was spacer's choice, um, that was based on a Simpsons episode where Bart got a credit card and Lisa was figuring out that he was doing it, so he bought her Trucker's Choice pet pills. And I always like that word Trucker's choice.

So when we did spacers choice, I don't know why I just went — it's not the best choice, it's spacers Choice, knowing it was going to be a cheap brand and they're kind of just telling you it right there. Um, there was another slogan that Leonard came up with called taste the freedom, and that was because spacers choice is a division of United defense Logistics. Because, of course, because of course it is.

The other one that I liked was anti-clios and they're slogan better than nature. So you know. They need a lot of uh drugs. That one came from two sources.

One was Futurama, mom's friendly robot company. I love Mom, I loved how she presented herself as this nice, sweet old lady, but really she was this ruthless corporate executive, and there used to be a TV show on the weekends which was a television psychic named Miss Cleo um, and I hadn't thought about that in years, but then somebody did a song called Miss Cleo, I don't, I don't think you really know, basically saying: but she really making predictions, were those predictions right? And I just merged them together into Auntie Cleo, which was this friendly, you know, older woman, and Auntie Cleo made your prescription drugs and foods that probably were dosed and the rule was, you know, anything she made was better than nature. These were hard to get right, I mean. We wanted these things to be, as Leonard talks about, not too silly and kind of dark, um. One of those things came, not from a, named brand, but we needed meat to be in a lot of these things. So we wanted things.

You know, borst was the meat, borst product, abort pockets and, uh, bostloaf, all these bore space things. And I had this idea for the Sisty Pig, which was a pig that had been genetically modified to have cancerous tumors that were erupt all over its body. But two things about them: they were pure meat, they were pure flesh and they would drop off naturally, so it didn't kill the pig. So you could Harvest Meat off an animal like you would Harvest fruit off a tree. Now the company did this because it was way cheaper to get to raise an animal to an adult. And then Harvest all this meat off it, rather than to raise it to be an adult and then you can Slaughter it and get one thing of meat, one product of meat. So they did it for the cost savings, but they presented it as kind of a very high-minded, you know, animal friendly. Look, you could have meat without killing the animal, and so that's, perfectly.

You know what? Anti-glio, or I believe.

Actually, no, they were made by CNP, which was because when I grew up on the East Coast, there was a lot of uh, grocery stores called A and P for Atlantic and Pacific, CNP. I think it's the first Central and Pacific. They didn't have any Atlantic stores in this universe, so they had genetically modified pigs to be Sisty pigs.

From then we generated a lot of fake food stuff. You. Know, modified rice. We had modified chocolate. We had modified um cows, The Woolly cows. We had modified snakes so you could get leather off of a snake because they shed their skin. We had all these things that would then went into products that then had to be divided. We had all these charts of like: we need armor and weapons and food. They went into all these weapons or all these categories, and then those had to be. We had to come up with product names and slogans and then assigned them to companies, because we had companies that made primarily drugs and we had the companies that made primarily weapons or armor, and then we had companies like spacers choice, that made a little bit of everything, but everything they made was kind of bad.

Now there's no way we could do this ourselves. So one thing that was: great about this is we made a lot and then we encouraged people on the team to make more. So that was one way not only to get people all focused in One Direction, but they got to own some of it too, because people went with nuts and some of the um, the logos that were created were awesome: um. It also meant that you know, once somebody makes something for a game, then they, that means they own it, and that was really important, because I I realized that I mentioned this in another video. I got really lucky in Fallout, because we were all kind of making the same game and I thought, wow, I must be a really good leader.

No, that didn't happen as much. It so happened a lot, but it didn't happen as much on Arcanum or vampire, and when I was at carbine on WildStar, that didn't happen at all. You know, I was there three years as a programming director and then three years at the design director, and the entire six years I was there I don't think. Everyone on that team was making the same game. Everybody had kind of their own game. They were making and throwing stuff in and it was really hard to get it to gel. And that's why I told you I learned more from. And I say failure I don't mean the, products were Fair, the games were failure. But my, role there, I don't view that as very successful and I learned more from that than I would from Fallout, because when Fallout shipped, so many things came together by complete happenstance that I didn't learn from it. So by the time I got to The Outer Worlds I was like, okay, Leonard.

And I designed enough things that we had a framework we had. This is the space of where our humor is and these are the space of our products and these are what kind of weapons and armor we want and this is how we want combat to feel. But we let people on the team run with it and own things and I think that works out a lot better that way and I think it kind of shows in the vast array of companies and products in The Outer Worlds. And what I love about it is all really goes back to 1970s — wacky package collecting Tim. So again, you never know what you do in life.

That's going to come back and inform your games. So I thought people would like to hear about that. Hope you liked it.
