+++
title = "Unpopular Game Opinions"
date = "2025-05-19"
id = "a2D1-X_9iOA"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "I talk about what it's like to prefer game features that other don't (and vice versa), as a gamer and a developer."
references = ["vp17yIB6Ijo", "fyu2DJBWPOc", "UZJ-1AS4UKA", "lmgJVUuS1I8"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about unpopular game opinions.

What do I mean by that? I'm talking about whether, as a gamer or a game developer, that you like certain things in your games that most people don't seem to like, or, vice versa, you love certain things in your games that it seems a lot of people don't like.

Let's talk about that. I've already talked about why you sometimes see games with features that you personally don't like, and it's because — and this is hard to accept — it is because you're in the small group — that there's a much bigger group of people who really like those features and — trust me, I've been there. I tend to like certain features that aren't the majority that people like, and I'll talk about that. This may be something that you find hard to see. Maybe you know you don't like this feature and none of your friends like it either, so why are they putting it in?

I've talked about that. I talked about it in a video about bad games, but people got sidetracked into talking about whether bad could be objective or not, which wasn't my point. Well, wasn't my main point, but I still think you know bad games, that when you start talking about what you care about it's, subjective. Even when you come down to something like a crash bug, there are games that have come out that have been amazingly popular and they were buggy. People didn't care because the game was that good.

If you and all your friends hate something, but games are coming out with those features and they're selling, well, you may be in a bubble. You may be in a bubble of just people who don't like it because my point is that some people out there like games you don't and you don't like some and you like some games out there. That other people don't, but sometimes the other side is bigger and I did a whole video on sales data for my games and those numbers don't lie. Um, adding casual features to one of my more recent games made it sell better, and It's interesting because that is like fact. We deliberately did something. It sold better than a game I did just a few years before. We didn't go, We decided to go a little more hardcore, let's um give things that people said they wanted 15, 20 years ago didn't sell as well. You can't really argue with the sales figures.

So what people try to do is say, well, people were tricked by your latest game. They thought they were getting something different. You know the sales were people who were fooled and I'm like, okay, it's been six years and the sales of that game is still good, so no people wanted those features.

What you have to accept — and I don't know why this is so hard — is that you, in some of what your — your opinions are, your flavors, your choices — you are not in the majority, you're in the minority, and that's what this is all about. Well, and then we can get sidetracked on that, the fact that your opinions are opinions and they are not Stamped Out facts. But I'm tired of talking about that, and there are some people who just think I think it. Therefore it's true, so this isn't for those people, but let me tell you. I'm going to go over in detail some things that I think about game that are is a minority opinion, and I'm basing this on the fact that most games don't go this way anymore and that a lot of people on this channel have argued against me on. But this is opinion, this is how, I feel about it, so you're not going to argue me out of that. The same way you're never going to argue with me that vanilla is better than chocolate. It ain't, but that's for me.

Eat all the vanilla you want. Good, it gets it off the shelves.

So let's talk about the first thing I don't like, or I should. I'll flip this around: the constructive. This is what I prefer. I prefer form over function in my games, and what that means is: um, I want the features I want, and I don't care as much if things don't look exactly right. I still want those features.

Conversely, if you want to make something look good, that's fine, but I think it's weird when things that look good, and only look good, and have no game. Effects at all, people argue about that they matter. And I'm talking about, like I mentioned, microtransactions. I don't care about them — for cosmetic items only, you know, items that have no bonuses on them. They just change how you look, and people said, no, those really matter, those are huge. I can't sometimes get into a team because I look stupid and I'm like, wow, you should have seen me playing EverQuest with my mismatched set of armor because I just picked things that had high bonuses. And yes, I did play with someone who literally avoided armor with bigger bonuses because he either wanted all black armor because it looked cool, or he didn't want a helmet on because his character had big hair. And let me tell you about helmets. That has been a point of contention between me and my artists since the '90s, because helmets hide hair and helmets often clip. Incorrectly into hair, so this has been one of those things where it's like: what do you do? Do you live with the clipping, which I'm fine with, or do you avoid the clipping by they not allowing certain kinds of helmets or turning off hair when you turn, put on helmets or just not allowing certain kinds of hair?

I'm like H, I don't really care, I just want helmets. I don't care as much as the look, I don't and I don't care about the Jank, but a lot of people do. I've been told, by the way, to live with things in my games that I don't like. I have a whole video on um ideas of mine that got rejected, often for better ideas, but still something I didn't want got put in my game and so if that can happen to the game director, you have to admit. That as a game purchaser. There's going to be a lot of games out there with things you don't particularly want. But they're there for a reason and a lot of times it's because a lot of other people want it. And also I'm not going to sidebar into like use of color from the artist because that's an accessibility thing. It's like I have to have it.

I'm color blind. I have to have um games, not use color as the only channel to convey whether something's good or bad or you know anything about it can't convey information if it's the owner Channel conveying it, because that's an accessibility thing, that's not a preference thing. So we're not talking about accessibility, we're talking about preferences. And just to be clear too, I like good-look art too. I love good-look art.

Who doesn't? But when I lose important features because somebody's like, well, we have to stay good-looking, that's where I draw My Line in the Sand. If you're saying we can't have helmets in the game because it'll stop your beautiful hair from being seen, no, I don't mind putting in a, feature where people can disable helmets from being displayed, but we're not taking helmets out of the game to this day. I wonder what was lost in Fallout because we spent so much time to avoid foot sliding? Which Diablo came out a year before, had it in droves and no one cared about. We didn't we kept our feet firmly planted and we spent a lot of time to make sure that worked right. And there were some people out there that said, hey, Tim, I love that, I noticed and I loved it. Great, but think of all the things that didn't go in. Think of all the programming time that was.

Lost and look at all the bugs at Fallout shipped, with, or features we didn't have that were immediately put into Fallout 2, like the you know um, take all button or step out, step out of my way to. NPCs were put in literally the first month we started on Fallout 2 because we did not have time to put it in Fallout. And when I look back at all the months of man time that were lost to making feet not slide, uh, part of me just dies inside. So, form over function, I'm always the form guy.

If, you're arguing, we have to lose a feature because something looks better, you and I will have an argument about it, but I realize I'm in the minority there. Another one is turn-based combat.

I'm on record of saying I like it. Now specifically what I mean, to just make sure people don't.

Quote that out of context: I prefer turn-based combat for isometric games because I view isometric games as being more tactical and less immersive. If you're going first person, fine, go real time. They're both real time and first person are both more immersive.

That's obviously where your design is going. Go with it. Make all your design, decisions align. However, for a turn-based — uh, for an isometric game, I like turn-based, I like stopping the action on my turn. So, whatever I do, no one else is doing anything, and I've given the example of Fireball is why real? I hate real time, and Real Time with pause doesn't fix my problem of if I put down an area of effect and then I unpause real time and people move in and out of that area.

That's not what I wanted. I want to be able to select exactly who's going to get. Hit and then go with That's what turnbas gives me. I hate when enemies I wanted to get hit walk out or maybe a companion wanders in don't like it.

Now there's a, there's a sidebar here. They could always have designed not to have game, not to have abilities like Fireball. They could have just done more things like magic Missile, where you select your Target and then the spell goes off in real time and always hits those targets. They could have done that, but the fact that they put in area of effect spells and things can move around after you target just annoyed me to the point where I put down some of those games after I played them for a while, because I'm just like I, I can't do this.

But that's me. That's my little minority opinion. Those games sell really well.

The designers are not wrong. Wrong for. Putting them in, and the people who like them are not wrong for liking them. I just don't like them, so that's what I want to talk about here is what? What does it feel like to have the unpopular opinion? What does that mean?

So let me say, as a game developer, I will say that I know that some of my games didn't sell as well because I wanted a feature and that I wanted that wasn't popular. And, conversely, I have games that sold great, even though they had features that I particularly wouldn't have chosen, but did or approved of them because I knew that's what more people wanted. As a gamer, that means that games will often ship with features I don't like but a whole bunch of people do, and vice versa. There's a lot of games out there that I love, but they're not going to sell very well. Well, they're Niche games.

What I always tell people is: you should just be happy that gaming is such a big smorgus. Borg, now the buffet table is huge. There's something on that table you like.

I've talked about discoverability. I've talked about how it's hard. It's hard to find those games now, but I did give advice in that discoverability video which is linked below of fi. Just find a reviewer who's taste align with your own and wait for them to put reviews up for games and see and use that as a decision to buy it. Sure, you won't be buying games pre-order, but a lot of you think that's not a good idea anyway. So great you get to support the let's not pre-order game crowd just because you want to get your tastes, uh, accounted for before you buy a game anyway. I thought this was important enough to say. Because I think some of my videos people get sidetracked into other things, and I just want one clear thing I'm saying here, which is you may like something or hate something, and it seems to be either not the things you like aren't in enough games and the things you don't like are in a lot of games, and that may be because you are not on the side you're, on the minority side, the there's more people who like that feature than people who don't like it, or vice versa, and that's why you're seeing more. So that's not always the case, but it's the case frequently enough that I kind of felt the need to State it, just so people can hear. Some of the things you like, most people don't and some of the things you hate, a lot of people do like, and that's it.
