+++
title = "Sometimes It's Just Business"
date = "2024-01-03"
id = "ABBR5VQHIQs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about that phrase — nothing personal, it's just business — which is usually used by companies when they're about to do something not too nice and they don't want you to take it personally."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about that phrase — nothing personal, it's just business — which is usually used by companies when they're about to do something not too nice and they don't want you to take it personally.

It's just business. I want to tell some stories about friends trying to use me to get a job or getting a job through me, where it didn't end up well, because the moral of the story is it really wasn't personal, it really was business. Now, if you have a job in the game industry, I guarantee you probably have stories like this. A lot of people try to get in the industry through their friends or family members. I'm not even going to talk about the number of times I've been contacted by relative to either get them a job or one of their kids a job, or even how a woman I went to high school with 30 years ago contacted me once to get her son a job.

All these people with no experience, unwilling to do anything, classes, demo anything. Just hey, get me a job. What I want to do is I want to tell three stories as anonymously as possible. About three times I had to say to a friend: hey, it's business. First one was I worked someplace and they really desperately needed a specific type of specialist. A friend of mine was that specialist. I recommended him, since they could find no one else, they hired him.

It did not work out on both ends. Um, I don't think he was handled well and I don't think he handled the situation well and he ended up quitting. After that happened, my boss came to me and said: you know, it's going to be a while before I trust any recommendations you have for PE for people to be hired. And I was like o and again and he said: nothing personal. That was from a business point of view a waste of a lot of time and money. And he was not wrong.

The second story is someone that I'd worked with previously at another company. Uh, as a programmer, he somehow had an agreement with that company that no one could see his code. So, even though he technically wasn't on my team, when he gave my team code to use, it would be a pre-compiled library and a header file. So all you could see of his code were the header functions, so the API of his code 10 years later I'm working at a company and he approaches me and said can we have lunch or? And I agreed and he said hey, I'm applying for a job there and it wasn't in my department. And he said I was hoping you could put in a good word for me and I said I, I can do that. And he said: well, they want me to take a programming test and I don't want to do that. So I was hoping you could just vouch for my code. And I gave him a strange look because he was immediately like: why are you looking at me like that? And I was like you've never let me see your code. I've never seen your code, and I remember twice having issues with your code. That was with your code, but we had to wait for you to get around to it because we couldn't go in and fix it ourselves, because you wouldn't let us see your code. I said you're going to have to take the test and he was like: well, you should just vout, tell, them I don't need to. And I'm like how would I do that?

He got so mad, he just left. He never took the test, never applied. And I remember telling him I said: don't take this personally, but everybody who applies here as a programmer takes that programming test. Do not make this a personal thing. Take the test or don't.

That's on you, so he left, third story: someone wanted to come on board on a project I was on as a designer. I had worked with him before, very distantly. Um, I was like sure, but you know there is a design test and you are going to have to get the approval of the lead designer in that area. He was like sure he took the test. The lead knew, we were friends and he brought me the test and he said, hey, just so you know this test isn't very good. And he showed me the test and I agreed: objectively it was not very good.

Um questions. Were incompletely answered. You know, if there was a question that said, tell us about a, b and c, they say something about a ramble, bit B and then just stop. I mean so this was objectively incomplete answers. And then the one that was subjective, which had a design that you had to do, immediately showed holes in the design.

You know, we both, me and my lead, had questions about what about this and what would happen if this happened. And I see a lot of issues with this. It would take a lot of massaging to even make this design work. He said: I'm glad you feel that way because I'm not going to extend an offer. Well, my friend contacted me and said, hey, I I heard I'm not getting an offer and I said, yep, that your, test was not very did, was not up to the standard.

We have, and he basically said: can't you override that, because you're in charge. And I had to tell him I'm like, how would that look if I overrode my lead? He knows what your results were. He graded your test himself, but if I forced you onto the team, how do you think that's going to work? Why would you even want that?

And he got mad. He was mad at me and I said, look, this isn't personal, it's business. Um, and he left angry, now why am I telling you these stories?

One, if you're are, if you have a game development job, brace yourself. Friends and family members are going to ask you just to get them a job, and some of them will not want to do any effort for it whatsoever. They just want you to do it. So I'm going to warn you that's going to happen.

But the other thing I wanted to mention — was there's that phrase — It's not personal, it's business — which is usually uttered by people who think a company's doing a particularly despicable thing and trying to pass it off as business and not personal, especially after they tell you: we're all family here and then they lay everyone off. I get the separation of personal and business and I like it. Um, I've said before I've worked with some of my friends. There are also some of my friends that I wouldn't work with because I know we wouldn't mesh.

We would have differences of opinion on code. We have difference opinion on design or even the type of game. It does have to make sense for us to make a game together — we're friends — but we shouldn't make a game together. Similarly, I think that you're going to sometimes have to tell: a friend or relative of yours this is not going to happen and you really don't mean it personally.

It's from a pure business point of view. This partnership does not make sense. It does not make sense for you to be employed here. It does not make sense for you to want to be an employee here. Your skill set is not what we're looking for, or the way you like to work isn't a match for this, and I know a lot of people take things like that personally or say: well, the company should accommodate me, you should find an accommodation for me for working with someone like me, and to a point I agree. But if you're trying to come to a company that makes RPGs and all your games are action games and everything in your test is, yeah, this should be done, the action, you know. F first person shooter way. That's probably just not a good fit. It has nothing to do with your skill set or how good our test is or how great our company is, it's just that's not a good fit.

So I wanted to tell those stories, and also, um so one. You know you're not alone if this happens to you, happens to everyone, and eventually you are going to have to break bad news to a friend or a family member that they're not working, they're not getting the job. So I wanted to know it wasn't just you going through this, but also I want wanted to underline that, yes, a lot of times businesses do nasty things and try to tell you not to take it personally, but sometimes decisions are made that are pure business and if you bring friendship into it, you're not a good friend, and I'm saying this is someone who applied at a company, flubbed the test — new people who work there really high up — but I didn't contact them at all and say, hey, can you get me the job? I moved on because what I? I don't want to get a job that I don't deserve and I certainly don't want to put a friend of mine in a really bad position of overriding someone who works under him just to get me on board. And I'll tell you something: companies that I haven't gone to. Some of them I was like, oh, I really regret, I think I would have loved it there, but a few of them. Later on something happened and I'm like, ooh, I wonder if I dodged a bullet. So those interviews and the tests you have to take to get a job, they work a lot of the time. I know some people.

Hate interviews and hate tests and think that they're completely stupid and don't test anything, but I believe they do screen out some people and they also screen out the companies. If a company's asking you certain kinds of questions and has a certain kind of interview, you can sometimes tell: this is not a place I want to work. It works both ways and that's why you should ask questions at interviews, because at the end of it, you should find out whether that company's a good fit for you as well of whether, um, you're a good fit for them it's a two-way street. So I guess the theme of this is — sometimes it is just business.
