+++
title = "Collecting Feedback"
date = "2025-03-12"
id = "AHiwa1nruUU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Feedback"]
summary = "I talk about collecting feedback on your game, including different sources and what to do with it."
references = ["xM6Cr04wWSc", "sCGeOsHV4Ag", "gCjHipuMir8", "bA-P3p7PdEc"]
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about collecting feedback, specifically how and when and what to do with the feedback that you get on the game you're making.

So this is obviously aimed at game developers, but I think I thought a lot of people would like hearing about this. So here we go. I'm going to break this into feedback you get before you ship and feedback you get after you ship, so before you ship, they're basically three sources of feedback. You can get feedback from the team itself. People will be playing the game and be working in different parts of the game and they're starting to give you feedback saying, hey, I don't think this is working.

Or hey, I just this just happened to me and it was really fun. That's great, because these are people who are really close to the game you're putting together and are really invested in it can also be bad, because these are people are really close to what you're putting together. And really invested in it, so that's a pro and con right there.

Because they may be so close, they don't see a problem, or they played the game a 100 times. They don't see a problem versus. They may see a problem go, and that's not a big deal, unlike someone who ends up buying the game may think it is a big deal. So it's a good time to collect feedback, though it's early as possible. QA feedback is especially important.

I have an entire video on how we play tested The Outer Worlds. I'll link it below.

Feedback from your QA staff is invaluable because no one will play your game as frequently or as much as QA, although I gave them — I think I gave them — a run for their money on several of my games, but in general, QA plays your game all day, every day, so they see a lot of problems because they're in there that they're working, they're using those uis all day long, they're playing against that AI all day long. They see issues, listen to them, and then part of the team is your publisher. They will give you feedback as well. I found that some publisher feedback was invaluable. They pointed out something that we weren't seeing, or they pointed out something that just a slight change would make the game way more um Broad in appeal. Frequently, though, they're thinking of more of cya stuff.

They're like uhoh, you know, I think I saw a booby on level two — take care of that. So their stuff tends to be much more specific and usually leans towards cut this, not add this. Another form of feedback you can get before shipping is focus testing. Now let me tell you I've got a whole video and it's link below on Focus testing. And I just tell you right now I have a LoveHate relationship with Focus testing. The love is you get some really good raw feedback from people have no idea what they're going to see. The downside is sometimes you just get the oddest, most unactionable feedback, especially from people who they're like I, like first person shooters, and you put an RPG in front of them like this is dumb. I, you know you're like I don't know what to do.

So Focus testing is great. You don't have to feel beholden to all the comments you get from Focus testing. But I would recommend doing Focus testing as soon as you can, probably as soon as you hit vertical slice, and then another one, the. The final one I'm going to talk about before shipping is there's something called mock reviews. These are companies or individuals you can contract.

They will play your game, and then write a pretend review for it as if they were working for one of the many game review sites, and often that includes a score and they back it up by saying: well, I crashed this many times and the story fell apart here, or I couldn't continue here, or I had these problems, but I love this and I love that and I really wanted to keep playing. Those are very similar and they're really good to the reviews you're going to get after you ship. I would listen to a mock reviewer over a focus tester probably, but what i' probably do is listen to them for different reasons. I think the mock reviewer will give you more actionable feedback, where the focus testers will give you much better feels, much better Vibes. Like this is how the game is presenting itself: whether that was good for those particular Focus.

Testers or not, you can't deny. Here's how the game is presenting itself. So those are the three big sources of feedback: before you ship from the team, from Focus testing and from mock reviews, and then after you ship. There are two big sources of feedback. One is reviews, and that's obvious. You're going to get reviewed by a lot of different sites. So many different kinds of reviews, various types: journalists, bloggers, influencers, vloggers. You're going to get reviews from all kinds of people and some of them that's all they do — is review things.

So that's great. What I would recommend doing with these, is try to keep track of the common pros and cons. Also, if it's someone who does a lot of reviews, maybe look at some of their Past reviews to see how they skew. If they don't like certain features, if they hate a turn-based games, then expect them not to like your game if it's turn-based. But if what you want to make is a turn-based game, look at what other reviewers who like turn-based games are saying. Don't automatically go, well, he didn't like it, I guess. Be better, be, real time.

At this point I want to mention again the UI designer I had on The Outer Worlds, Chris Stewart. He went through and collected all the reviews that came out for The Outer Worlds and put them in a spreadsheet. He analyzed them on all the variations, what they mentioned, how frequently it was mentioned, the pro and con of what was mentioned. So we had, we had, this wonderful data of look at all these reviews 90% of them mentioned this feature and they liked it 30% of them mentioned this feature and they all didn't like it. So it's interesting because 90%, all, and they all liked — is very different than 30% and they all disliked because the other 70% didn't even mention it, which tells you something. And if 90% liked it and the other 10% didn't mention they like it, you have to.

That's why these numbers are important, but I'll talk about that at the end, when I'm thinking what, you do with it. Online comments are similar and I have a video on do Gamers know what they like and do developers know what Gamers want? We read online comments, but it's hard because there are so many of them and there's so much disagreement on things. I know Gamers don't like to hear that, but it is true. On almost anything you want to mention, there are people like the feature and people who don't like the feature, and I made a video where, basically, what I said was the signal to noise ratio. Is low and people walked away going. He's blaming gamers.

What I'm saying is the actionable feedback is surrounded by a lot of in actionable feedback and it's hard to find it. People say we'll just go to the people who are actionable. Sometimes that's hard to find, but we do track them and we go through them and we do the same thing. We look at what features get mentioned. Um, we look at whether they were liked or disliked. We track how frequently it's mentioned and whether it's pro and con and then we review it. Keep in mind — and this is why I said it in one of my videos — more and more online comments are skewing con. They list all the things they didn't like about a game and very few of the things they liked.

So you have to take that into account if you're trying to figure out what to do. Bear in mind: many online comments — and I want to even say most, greater than 50%- will certainly include all the things they didn't like, and you have to figure out what to do with that. In fact, let's talk about what to do with feedback. So let's say you've collected all this feedback, what do you do with it? First of all, you got to look at the feedback.

If it's actionable, that's great, if it says this particular thing I didn't like and I wish they had done this, and if it, if the UI just worked this way, it' be great, that's great. It gives you something to test right away. If it's non-actionable, then you put it in a pile and go.

Well, let's see how many people mention this. If it's just the AI is dumb, if 90% of the people say your AI is dumb, you got a problem. With your AI, even if you have no idea what it is. So then you probably want to look at who's giving the feedback. Um, some companies go by popularity, if 90% of the people don't like something, then that thing is probably going to go away. Other people, though, look at their Target demographic.

If you're making a dating Sim and people who never play dating Sims don't like it, you maybe you can ignore their comment. If you're making a firsters shooter and somebody says I play M, mainly role playing games and I wish there was a different character skills I could buy, you may be able to ignore that. So you kind of want to know what your audience is and try to look at the feedback from people you target targeted, but for a lot of people it's just: I want to sell as many copies as possible, so I go by sheer number, I go by popularity of the feedback. But you also want to look at how consistent it is. If you have a feature and some people like it and some people hate it, you're going to have to figure out what you want to do. If it's something that most people like or most people hate, it's clear. But if it's the closer you get to 50/50, you might have hit on something polarizing. For some of you may go great.

I wanted my game to be polarizing. I wanted that topic to be discussed. I wanted that to be something the game digs into and leaves it for the player to figure out what they think.

Great. Some people, though some developers, are like: o, we don't want to be polarizing, we don't anyone to say anything bad, and they removed the polarizing feature. So again, you have to decide. What you want to do with your game, which should guide what you do with the feedback.

There's also a cost analysis and a lot of people don't like thinking about this, don't want to think about it, don't even want to admit it exists. But for every potential problem with your game you have to look at how much will it cost to fix and how much will it cost not to fix. In other words, if it's a really pernicious problem that would require redoing a lot of things in the game, it may be really expensive to fix and you may just go. We're try to tackle that in the sequel. But if it's causing lots of people to stop buying your game, then there's a cost to not fixing it and you have to take that into account.

How you measure that. It depends on your game. It depends on your budget, it depends on who's paying you, but that cost analysis has to be done. And then, finally, you have to think about when and how you want to use feedback, even if you've decided this is wrong, this, didn't land, this didn't have a good enough appeal. We have a better way of doing this. You have to decide: are you going to patch the existing game, which It's fairly cheap to do that now 20 years ago, 30 years ago, that was an expensive thing to do. Also, Publishers control whether or not you can patch and they may have reasons for not patching that are publisher reasons. You may not have the rights to patch. You may instead go: let's fix that in the DLC. In other words, they didn't really like the gun play, but that's a bit of a significant patch where, when we put in the DLC, we have better gun play in that or we have guns that work better or we're filling the holes that people are saying, hey, there's no weapon that does this.

We'll put one in the DLC and then finally you may go. This is pretty significant and making a patch or putting in the DLC will change the game, like the vibe of the game or the how you would play and from the very beginning. So you may want to go: we'll do that in a sequel. We're just, we're change all that Gunplay around, but we're going to do it in the sequel and then finally it may be something that's so different — it's like it, didn't It's true that it's not liked and it didn't land well in this game, but changing it would be either so costly or so dramatic. Ally, change the game that you may. Just go. You know what.

We're going to take that feedback into account on the other games we make and this one, whether it gets a SE or not, we're just going to leave it alone. It's hard to think of things like that when, as an example — but you know you — you might say: you know, if you're making a western RPG and someone's like I hate that all the guns are kinetic, give me an energy pistol or whatever you're like. No, I get that, you want more variation.

We're try to figure out how to do that with Kinetic weapons, but it's a West RPG. However, we're going to make a note that people want way more variety than we provided in this RPG and maybe in our next RPG, in a different setting, we're provide more weapon variety of that type. So I hope this made sense and I hope you. Guys liked this discussion of feedback: how to collect it and what to do with it.
