+++
title = "Meta Post Mortem"
date = "2024-10-15"
id = "am52Ceuzgh8"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Postmortem"]
summary = "I talk about the biggest lessons I learned from my games, based on post mortems I wrote after they shipped."
references = ["Kh5JMp5_5nQ", "ljnaL7N5qtw"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to do a meta postmortem of my games and I will explain what I mean by that.

So every game that I've made, starting with Fallout — I don't think I did this for rags to riches and I know I didn't do it for barale construction set or grand slam bridge — but starting with Fallout, every game I've done, I've written up some kind of postmortem notes to myself where I BAS basically looked at the shipping game, the game that went out the door, and wrote down what I thought went well and went poorly for that game. Mostly it was about the end state of the game, the features of the game, but sometimes it was about the game development process, um, or sometimes it was just here's how I felt after it went out. By the way, it is normal to be a little sad when you're game ships. I remember talking about this with someone at obsidian once after The Outer Worlds went out and he was like why am I sad? And I said, well, for years you devote yourself to this thing and then it's done and it's out of your hands and at this point you can't make big changes to it. You can do bug fixing and stuff and balance tweaks, but it's kind of done and it's out there and there's just this feeling of mild — it's not depression, it's just a slight sadness that you get when a game ships and that's normal. So I would tend to write these postmortem. That was a weird diverge. Other people on the team often wrote them too and I would ask them for them and they were always worried I was going to be like: oh, I can't believe you said this, but I liked seeing what they thought went right and wrong. It was as eye openening as my own post-mortems were to me years later. To see what other people on the team thought went right and wrong. Now I've also mentioned — I've even written these for game — I didn't work on that were, but were part of ips I created — and I did that because I wanted to look at those post morms myself later and see if there was any Trends among the games.

Now I'm not going to ever release these um, mainly because they're filled with everything I filled. They're filled with everything I thought went right and wrong and I know people if I released these they would focus on what went wrong. They would try to figure out who was responsible for and they would either call them out or the people who think I'm calling them out would get upset.

So I decided to do a meta postmortem. I looked through all my postmortem to see if there were any themes that ran through. Them, now, this was interesting. The success themes, what went right — was way more variable and subjective.

Um, some people loved the stories in some of my games. Other people hated the stories. Some people loved ular levels or items and other people hated them and thought they shouldn't be in the game. There were systems that were loved and systems that were hated, NPCs that were loved and NPCs that were hated.

Um, it, I couldn't easily make a top five. Here are the things that we always did right in all of my games. It just I. I couldn't figure out how to do that.

However, interestingly enough, the failures in my games were way more universally agreed upon, and I think part of the reason is. I did a whole video called learning from failure and I will link it below. I think it's way easier to learn from failure. And because of that I think when a game goes out that has problems, people are more likely to talk about them. But when a game goes out that's doing really well, people are playing it.

They're not going online, going wow. The story in Act 2 is really one of the best act two stories I've ever seen in a game. Nobody, really seems to write that, or very few people do. Where a lot of people will get online and go, oh my goodness, the ending was the biggest let down of any game I've ever played, ever in the history of games in the universe. So because of those reasons, because the success seemed VAR on my varied on my different games, but failures — I could extract some common failure points. I put together a list of the top five problems that existed in most of my games. I almost said all, but for the first two there were exceptions and I will talk about that.

So here they will. I will talk about that, so here they are, in no particular order. So these aren't necessarily the biggest issues. These are just the way I wrote them down. So the first problem that existed in most of my games: they were over scoped, and by over scoped I mean basically there were way too many features in them. You could trace the cause of this to: we had this much money. We should have made this many features for this many people who are working on it, but I wasn't good at estimating that. Other people on the team weren't good at estimating that.

Many of the features seemed like: well, that's core to the design pillars, we can't get rid of them. So we just dove in and tried to make the best. Of trying to get this defined game out with the amount of money we were being given. And, of course, once you define a game and the publisher says we're going to give you this much money and you sign, you've now agreed to make this list of features for this much money.

I've mentioned this before. I think Arcanum is my worst, most egregious example. I call it my kitchen sync game because every idea that me or almost anyone else on the team had went into that game. We almost never said no to anything and there were so many features and I've mentioned a few that I would have taken out, like the newspaper, and inevitably people go no. That was one of the best features.

No matter what feature I mentioned taking out, there's somebody who goes no, no. That was one of the best features which happened when we were making it, which is why it ended up over scoped and it was. It was a budget thing and I think I've mentioned this a few times. Leonard and Jason and I had to pay ourselves like half salaries for the first year because there was so much stuff for starting up a business that we had forgotten to take into account. Like we had desks for everybody and furniture and all that, and we're like, oh shoot, we need a conference room and furniture for there and we didn't account for it and that seems small. But once you're like conference room refrigerator and you do all these things, it starts to add up and you're like, oh, we didn't, we didn't plan for a lot of this. So for that first year it was tough because we were living on half of the salary we thought we'd get and it was rough. No one was. To blame but for us, but I'm just saying we, were kind of like We can't keep doing this because I had a lot of people go.

Why didn't you hire a business manager? Why didn't you hire a producer? Why we didn't have the money, and unless people wanted to work for us for free, we already did a year of uh subsist since living and we couldn't do that again.

Now, when the reviews came out for Arcanum and many of my other games, there were common ways. Very few game reviews said these games were overs scoped. But here's what you hear in a lot of reviews of my games: they were unbalanced. There were unfinished quest lines or quest lines that finished in an unsatisfactory way. They just sudden, they suddenly just wrapped up. A lot of levels, especially levels towards the end, feel rushed like.

They're either big and empty or they are, uh, really small compared to what they feel like they should have been, and they're absolutely right. All those things happened, now, I do believe an exception to this was The Outer Worlds. I don't believe we over scoped it and, interestingly, one of the biggest complaints in the reviews was it was too short. And even before we shipped and I had read any of those reviews, I mentioned to the team that if the biggest complaint we got about The Outer Worlds was it was too short, we done something right, because it meant we didn't have a lot of unbalanced stuff and unfinished quest lines and rushed levels. So I do think, I do think by the end of my career I had learned how to scope a little better, but also I had a lot of support on The Outer Worlds. I had a lot of people looking at our, design docks and a lot of production support, so that helped. Um, the second one, the second of my top five of things most of my games had in common were bugs. I don't think it's G to shock anybody.

Nobody's out there going, no, Tim, your games had bugs. Yes, and, by the way, I'm not just talking about code. Um, I think a lot of my games went out with bugs in system mechanics, bugs in particular, scripts on things, and I have whole video on the difference between code in scripts and or that. You know you code General things and then scriptors would come in and make exceptions and I think there were a lot of bugs in scripts.

Um, I'm not even talking balance here. I'm okay if things aren't really balanced, I'm okay with that, but I will just go on record. And saying we never intended harm to be the OneStop shop for every Mage and we never intended it to be that way. And that was just. We were so rushed and people go: why didn't you fix that? And it's like, well we were. We were literally until the g day that game shipped, fixing crash bugs, and crash bugs were just way more high priority than oh, you have a spell that costs too little or does too much or it's too fast to cast, or maybe all of those or maybe a mix of them. So didn't happen, now again, I think The Outer Worlds was an exception to this. It shipped in a remarkably stable bug uh low bug State compared to my, other games and compared to a lot of previous obsidian games, and we got called out for that being a really good thing. So I think The Outer Worlds was an exception for the first two ones on this list.

Now here are the. Here's my third one. I think a lot of my games have what I would call a weak opening. I think this is something I did get better at over time. But there's this rule that you should grab the players in the first hour or they will stop and move on to the next game, and as my career went on, that hour started shrinking. People were saying: you got to grab them in the first 30 minutes. Nope, you got to grab them in the first 10 minutes. Nope, you got to grab them in the first five minutes. And it's like whoa, and what that meant was games had to become, in my opinion, a lot more superficially, a grand ised in the first few minutes to convince players not to go.

I'm done, I've seen this and move on to something else. In other words, you have to pull out some big monster or some cool weapon or some cool feature, even though you didn't intend to give that to the player right away. You kind of have to do it, because if you don't grab them right away, they're on to the next thing early on.

I think my games didn't do that well enough. Fallout had kind of a weak opening, Arcanum had kind of a weak opening.

Um, I think later on we got better at it, but getting we were, we were fighting that. We're getting better with an opening, but the time to do that is shrinking rapidly now.

I'm just going to go on record here: tutorial levels are not the solution to this. Most of my games I want people to replay and tutorial levels are annoying to replay over and over. Again, if you're going to have them — and I don't recommend you do — I'd make them skippable.

What I like instead is, for the first few minutes you play a game, it kind of pops up things on how you can, um what you're supposed to do, like: oh, this is how you crouch, this is how you sneak, and you can always click something going. I don't want to see this anymore great. So the fourth thing I think most of my games had a problem with is they were Niche. Now, um, I see people in hindsight go: oh, your games were just so, um, what do they call them that?

Flawed masterpieces, which I think is a nice way of a saying it's buggy but also very nit, and it's not just in the settings, but also in the mechanics and sometimes just the style of it. We made a lot of games. Um, early on, the team and I were making the game just for ourselves. We put in what we thought was funny. We put in mechanics we liked. We did quests that we wanted to do, that we didn't see in other games and we never thought, hey, is this going to have broad appeal? I still remember the first time a marketing person said what's the demographic for your game? And I'm like: what are you talking about? Isn't that? Don't I show you my game and you figure that out? And they said you should be thinking about that from the beginning.

Not necessarily saying you should do that, but I think my games all suffer from being niche, in other words, having a smaller, less wide appeal than they could have had had. I thought about that from the very beginning. It's just the way my brain works is: oh I. Got a bunch of ideas in my idea book and a bunch of mechanics and a bunch of setting ideas and all that. I want to do that and I rarely go hm, what's popular now, hm, what seems to be missing in these other people's games that I could provide that would make them have more broad appeal, just doesn't enter into my brain hole. And then the last thing I'm going to say — which is something that came out of my postmortem, which isn't something you're going to read in review or even other people's postmortem — is: I feel, especially now that I'm at the end of my career, I feel like I was a little too one genre note. In other words, I have lot, lots of ideas that don't fit well into RPGs, but they fit great in other genres like this would make a great tactical game, or this would make a great adventure game, or this would make a great shooter. But I've often wondered if my some of my games would have worked better in one of those genres or if I should have made another game in one of those genres.

I never explored it. Part of the reason was I did a lot of work in RPGs, had initial success There that was the path of lease resistance. The other reason is, like actors, you tend to get typ cast in the industry and once you get known as the RPG guy, it's really hard for me to sell a non-rpg to Publishers. It's the reason I was super excited to work at carbine, because MMO RPGs and RPGs are distinct things and I was really excited to be working on something outside the RPG space, even if it was adjacent and a bit overlapping. But looking back on a lot of my games, I sometimes wonder: would a game like this had been? Would this had been better in another genre?

And I see that repeated in a lot of my postmortem. So anyway, that is my meta postmortem analysis of my games. Hope you liked it.
