+++
title = "Shorter Times And Smaller Budgets"
date = "2023-11-22"
id = "APHKu89av6U"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Production"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about what to do when time and budget are tight."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about what to do when time and budget are tight.

In fact, this is a answer to Abraham drinken 2534, who asks or says: I would like to see you talk about the hierarchy of needs within development and what's are some of the first things to go when time and budget get tight. Well, before I say that, let me remind you that people often talk about a triangle in development with three sides: good, fast and cheap — and you have to pick two. So if you pick fast and cheap, you're not going to get good. I don't know how much I believe in this situation, because first of all, once you go cheap, I don't see you getting good or fast. I don't see how you get fast with cheap.

But anyway, I've been in this situation a few times. Uh, BST taale construction set was done in 14 weeks. Uh, Rags to Riches was done on a shoestring budget.

Um, very tiny team. I think I was the only programmer and the producer doubled as the designer, in addition to the guy who made the board game. So it was a very tiny team. And then we got artwork done, mostly by um, I think one or two internal 2D artists and then a bunch of external devs and then tempo of elal evil I've talked about on here. That was done.

The original budget was 18 months and when they switched from version three, D and D to version three and a half, they gave us an extra whopping two months. So that was a really fast lowbudget game. So I've done this, and so I thought about my answer of what would what you have to sacrifice in order to make something, that's with a small team or with a small, amount of time and small budget. So the first thing I thought was: smaller team. A big chunk of your budget goes to your team. If you reduce team size, your budget gets smaller automatically. Not sure about time, but your budget will shrink. If it's time you need to reduce and not budget, then think about using external development.

Um, you know, hiring some contract artists or contract programmers. That doesn't always seem to work, though. Um, in my experience with it is you often — you more frequently — ask for redos on the art because it doesn't quite match the style, or you have to ask for additional time about from the coders to, uh, optimize their code. Or you have someone who's not external who gets their code have to optimize it in house, so you spend time there. Also, if you have enough external developers, you usually need to have a producer who just handles them, which then adds to your budget. But in many cases, external development can help. In modern times, in addition to shrinking your team, you can also o shrink your marketing. Marketing budgets have gotten much bigger. Um, I've worked on games where the marketing budget was bigger than the production budget, and you may be shocked by that, but the reason for this is there are so many games out there.

A huge problem with a modern game is just discoverability. You could make the best, coolest, funnest game ever and throw it up on Steam and no one would ever find it. So you have to do some kind of marketing, even if it's viral, even if it's convincing, or paying some influencers to play your game. You, need some kind of marketing, but that's something you could cut if your budget needed to be shrunk, and then you'd either have to find creative ways to have your game be discovered or just cross your fingers and hope it's so good it becomes discovered, um, another thing you can do is reduce your content, um, and yes, that means make a shorter game. Just, you know, cut out levels, cut out areas of your game, um, this will make your game, have you know, be playable faster. But, like I've said to teams I've worked with, if the biggest complaint people have about your game is they want more of your game, well, if you have to pick one complaint to have, that's the one I want to have. Gee, I wish there was more of this.

So, if you make a shorter game, you have fewer areas, which is less level, design work, which is a lot of time. You can have fewer NPCs, with all the things that are associated with NPCs: inventories, balancing, voiceover, dialogue, just everything. Um, you can also get away with less. Art, if you have fewer areas, then in the areas you do have, you C cohesive art, like reusing trees and shrubs and ground and just and basically art makes sense because you're trying to make an area that looks like it's cohesive. If you have a lot of areas, though, that just look like the first area, people will notice that. So you can get, if you reduce the content in your game, you can get away with less art. Uh, another way to save on uh, time and money is to reduce the complexity of your game, and which basically means what?

I? What that you think it means make a simpler game, give the player fewer options. There's fewer character builds, there's fewer armor weapons, there's uh less choices they can make in the game, so you don't have to spend more time on those different paths, um, like I mentioned, with weapons. And armor, make a lot less art variation, not just for the player, but an enemy type. Reuse them, if humans are the best, because you can usually give them an animation of shooting a weapon and then put different weapons in their hand and you can get your variation that way.

One thing that often gets Overlook is go through your user interface and minimize it. UI has, in my experience, been one of the largest time syns in a game and one of the largest time syns that's never, ever planned for. UI just seems to always take longer than anybody plans and it's usually redone over and over again as you're trying to home in on that UI that conveys the information in a way that makes sense but isn't cluttered and is easy to use, and it's just hard to make a good UI, so sometimes you just skew towards: let's have less AI, let's convey things. Maybe a sound effect is enough. I don't need an icon, I don't need a popup, and you move on from that.

You can also try shifting to a simpler genre — RPGs - and i' I've maintained this and it's not a well, it's what I make, so it's more complicated, but RPGs tend to have everything in it: there's exploration, there's dialogue, there's combat. You can always lean in and make an easier game that doesn't one of those. Adventure games often don't have combat. Um, FPS games often don't have dialogue. So not only does that make the game simpler in the sense of there's content you don't need to make again, that's team members you don't need to have. I don't need a narrative designer if all I'm running around is shooting zombies in the world, so, or you don't need a team of narrative designers.

You may still. Want a narrative designer on hand to do end slides and lore text and stuff like that. I'm just saying if you simplify one aspect of your game, maybe you don't need all of that and you can just make it simpler. Kind of tangential to complexity is richness. You can make a less Rich Game, which I see is a little different than less complex. I'll give you some examples. You could do less voiceover or no voiceover at all.

Um, it's not necessarily making the game less complex, but it is less Rich. It is less immersive. Um, there's a lot of rendering features that I feel like could be pulled back on and the game would be simpler and less Rich. Um, but you'd save a lot of time. Lighting — lighting tends to take a lot of time. Um, rendering features like reflection — I see people complain like they go into. A modern game and they look at a mirror and they don't see a reflection. Yeah, but guess what? You know, I've never seen anybody say: I, this game is perfect on every feature, except it doesn't have reflection.

I'm not going to buy it. Never seen anybody say that, so cutting out things like that will save time. Um, it also saves on bugs and it usually helps your frame rate. So reducing that kind of richness helps you in ways you might not have anticipated. Another way you can make your game less rich is: don't go 3D, go 2D.

Um, I know this is a matter of contention. Some people think 2D games can take just as long as 3 games, and I agree. But in general, 2D games are faster to do than 3D games. You either need less art or the art you do need is faster to create. So consider replacing doing your game as a 2d game instead of a 3D game, or replace some things in your game that are 3D with 2D. Maybe you can replace all the um cinematics with um, a 2d picture.

Uh, we did that in U pillars. Some of our opening cinematics were just drawn with text over top, and that's another thing. Text can sometimes replace show, so you want something to have happened in the game. Just have a tech slider go by like the beginning of Star Wars, saying this is what happened.

You don't have to have a cinematic that shows it. Or you don't have to have an in-game cinematic. You could just have it Fade to Black and say: you know, you know this bomb off or uh, this person escaped, and then let the person imagine it. Sometimes the thing it's replacing is something that would have taken you months to do, so consider doing that actually, though. When it comes to cinematics, though — and I want to be clear here — cinematics can go either way. Um, you can lose them and replace them with a slide that has some text on it, and you can save a lot of time, but you can also use them to replace something that would take a lot more time, like if you need an entire area for the player to play through so they get through a story plot Point. Sometimes it' be a lot faster, especially if there aren't any variations in that story plot point. The player always going to go here and is always going to discover, say, this dead body. You could replace that with a cinematic of just having the player walk into some area and say, oh, was hard getting here, oh, there's the dead body.

Oh they, killed her blah. That would be something you could do. And then you if, the Cinematic — by having a cinematic, you can avoid a lot more expensive things — go with do that. Sometimes, though, the Cinematic itself can be replaced with something even simpler, um, but ultimately, the best guide to how you will save time and budget is for you to understand what you're trying to make and also what your strengths are. What do you bring to the table, what are you trying to do, and how can you lean into the stuff you're good at?

Let's say you're a good narrative designer, or you have a really good narrative designer on the team. Why not make an adventure game or something that's come out recently, or combat free RPGs? It simplifies the system mechanics of the game immensely and a lot of things that would happen. In combat are replaced with people talking, which is: you have somebody to write all that and that's your strength. So if you've already got somebody who can do it, and especially if they're really good at it and can do it quickly, replace, just get rid of it.

Don't have combat in your game. Replace it with narrative. You can see the flip happening.

Let's say you've got a system designer who loves combat and gum mechanics. Well, maybe you should get rid of dialogue. Make a combat game, make a dialogue free. Um combat game, there are a lot of. You can also replace big areas of your game with this. There are a lot of games that are full on RPGs but when they go into the dungeon or they go on the quest themselves, there's not a lot of talking. It's mostly creeping around and killing Undead or, you know, killing bad.

Guys or a bandit who may, just you know, I'm going to get you, but you don't actually enter into a complex dialogue with them. Lean into your strength, decide what it is you can do well and quickly, and then do more of that and less of um the things that you really don't have the resources to make. So, wow, I talked longer than I thought.

Um, that is my answer, Abraham drinken — to what you can do when your time and budget are tight. Of course, the best thing to do is to get more time and more budget, but that, Al, isn't the answer, is it? So I hope this helps.
