+++
title = "Great External Ideas"
date = "2024-11-05"
id = "ax5olbUFxZQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Development"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today, I want to talk about great external ideas, and by that I mean ideas that came from outside the development team, that were really good and worked and ended up in the game."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today, I want to talk about great external ideas, and by that I mean ideas that came from outside the development team, that were really good and worked and ended up in the game.

This actually was a question from brains and beats, who asked: has there been a time when some person from high up or just not on the dev or design team brought in an idea that was actually great, and I love this question because, while I frequently told stories that have people off the team not being shown in the best light, I love that this is a way to Showcase some really good ideas that came from people who weren't on the development team. I'm going to define the development team as people who worked on the game as their daily job. You know every — everyone from the game director down to the most Junior person, is on the development team.

Now, this took me a long time to answer and I apologize to brains and beats. Uh, BNB, we're there. Right, we?

I can call you BNB. BNB asked this question months ago, but it's taken me a long time to answer, not because I wasn't thinking about it and not because I wasn't trying. It was because I could only think of a couple times someone off the dev team ended up with such a great idea that it went into the game and I knew there were more.

But every time I tried doing a search through my notes — the digitized ones — I couldn't figure out what term to use. I mean the word good or the word idea literally shows up all the time and external wasn't finding what I was looking for. So I wasn't sure what to look for.

So I finally just decided to read my notes again. I just skimm through everything which, as I've said, there are some of my notes.

I don't like reading either. Either I don't think I did really good in this situation or I've mentioned kind of the whole carbine notes. I just don't like reading through those again.

But I did because I knew that there were more than just a couple times and I came up with four different times where, and for some of these four, I should say four different projects, and on those projects it was more than one time that an idea came in externally that was so good we put it in the game and those projects are bar to construction set, Fallout, wild star and The Outer Worlds, so let's get into it. So, barale, construction set, old game of mine. I was brought in as a contractor. I realize, looking at my notes, that the entire idea of this game, the idea of taking BST tail one, two and three, and saying let's make a construction set, let's let players make their own maps and characters and monsters and spells, everything — that whole idea was given to me. I was hired as an external contractor. I was told this is what we want to do and a very high level design description.

Now I don't know where the idea came from, but it came from someone who hadn't been assigned to the team, so I know it was external. Looking at the credits for those games, there were lots of people who worked on the first three games who were still at interplay — I mean Brian Fargo, uh, Becky heinan, Bruce schlick, Bur — they all worked on those games. So I don't know how much of the design spec that I received came from a particular person, but I know it came from people who in, who ended up not being the developers of bar construction.

Set, so that's an interesting one right there. That's an entire game whose idea and Genesis and high level design was external. And then for Fallout there were a couple things and I know they've been mentioned in different videos here and there, but specifically twice there were two things that came, I know, from outside the team on Fallout. The first one was the name: when we tried coming with a name, brainstorming and we couldn't decide on anything, and then, when Brian Fargo had played the game, he suggested Fallout and that was what we shipped with, so that the entire name of this whole series is came from no one on the team. And then the other one was when we were putting special into the game. I think I mentioned that special originally didn't have perks in it and Chris Taylor had made this based on a home brew.

System he had and he presented to me and I think my only suggestion was let's add luck to the attributes. So it was SPECIAL before that or Ace IPS, however you want to look at it. But then when we showed it to Brian Fargo he suggested his suggestion was: I would like to have something more to buy when I go up a level than putting some points into skills. And since Chris and I both knew gerps and we already had all the code, he was like: Hey, I could design something sort of like advantages, but different. And the difference is: I mean perks and advantages, Ed, very similar code, but advantages in GPS were things you tended to frontload.

You bought them when you made the character. True, you could get them later, but the whole idea about them was: I'm making a character, what are their attributes, advantages? And disadvantages, and I'll buy skills later.

Well, Fallout kind of changed that and said: no, no perks, you don't start with any perks. You can start with a trait, which is kind of a good thing and a Bad Thing glued together, but perks are something you buy as an advancement of your character, and that whole — the Genesis of putting that in — came from Brian Fargo. So the next one I want to talk about is Wildstar. Um, you know I'm not a fan of really talking about that game, but I took over the design — uh of it as design director in 2008, and we had to write up a setting description and the original idea was that it was all going to take place on a planet that was the Nexus of the Multiverse, that if you had a coordinate system that defined your place in space time. And in a universe, the 00000000000000 point of that coordinate system was this planet and that explained all the different things we wanted to put in, because we wanted some crazy stuff in there. Then it lets do what we called flux, where there would be a flux point and then some part of a Zone would change and different things would appear there: different kinds of vegetation, different kinds of creatures it was.

It was an interesting idea when we showed it to Jeff strain who was the acting president of um production development at NC at the newly formed NC soft West which had — we were originally answering to — NC Austin and then they off opened NC soft West up in Seattle and Jeff train had moved over from Marinet and this is before UND dead Labs. We showed him our story and he suggested changing that backstory. He pointed out: that it was so broad that it pretty much allowed everything. And if you're, if your setting doesn't easily answer the question of what is part of this setting and what isn't, and if the answer is everything's part of it's too broad, it doesn't really give your setting enough of a flavor when you can say anything: oh you want robots, oh you want magic, oh you want high-tech, oh you want every It's too much, so he suggested changing it and what we ended up switching it to was what the game ended up shipping with, which was this planet was the home planet of the precursor civilization that predated all the other races that were in the galaxy and that worked, I think, really well for wild star. And it also was really cool because we explained the robots, as this was the civilization that built those sentient robots. So it worked out, and then the last one I want talk about is outer, The Outer Worlds.

Um, The Outer Worlds, the, Genesis of the idea similar to Bar taale construction set, the Genesis of the idea that the elevator pitch came from the owners and that was Fallout meets Firefly. That's what I was told when I sat down with Leonard barski and said, hey, I'm going to put together a new game at obsidian and the elevator pitches Fallout meets Firefly. That was the leaping off point for everything we did after that. But then another thing that I found in my notes that I had forgot gotten about was when we were putting together, the specification for the whole game, not just the design specification, but we were trying to estimate personnel and therefore budget and time and all that. One of the things we put in was we said we, wanted a producer. We thought, hey, one producer is going to be enough. I mean, we, know what we're doing.

And Chris Parker, one of the owners, said: you need more than that, you need at least four. And I remember I pushed back on that: I, I don't think we need four producers. I think one good lead producer will be enough. And he said: no, I, I really think you need more producers.

Let me just tell you we ended up putting: we put that in. Chris Parker was absolutely 100% correct. We needed all four of those producers and we worked them quite a bit. There was a lot of, there was some external — um, I think we did external artwork. Uh, uh, producer managed that.

We had lots of strike teams. Producers were assigned to those. We ended up, uh, interacting with the publisher a lot more. Than I thought we would remember. I said when we started out of Worlds I was told we weren't going to use publisher. So suddenly we had a publisher and, as much as I liked private division, it was really nice having a producer who did the majority of the interaction with that and, you know, told them what things that were going on, showed them the state of the game and then got their feedback and collated it for us. So that, right, there was something that, looking back, that was not something that came from us, that we were — it was suggested to us to have more than one producer. We ended up with four, the suggested amount, and it was a great idea.

I don't think I'd want to do a game anymore, uh, past a certain size, without a number of producers just to handle the logistics and the day-to-day intercommunication. Between all the people who are on the team. So anyway, brains and beat. I hope that answered your question and I hope that kind of shows that some really good ideas can come to your game from people outside of it.
