+++
title = "Creativity Under Pressure"
date = "2024-08-20"
id = "aYnnGpLY9M4"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Production"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about creativity Under Pressure."
references = ["Naig0iJ_E9E", "qBKd2z43K7E", "SrAuoqdl0os", "QJHpuJxMqiA", "eXJkecLBhOE"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about creativity Under Pressure.

Now, what made me think of this, of doing This relates to a bunch of videos I've done before and I'm going to mention them as I go along. But I read a quote from Carl BOS, who was a band member of craftwork, and he said — quote: creativity sometimes starts with a deadline and with a lack of money and with only a few possibilities, with not too many options. Wow I that's a good expression of doing art in a medium where just making that art costs money and making that art requires a group and making that art is part of an industry.

So I've talked about Crunch and pressure and all this. So let me — I'm going to do a bit of a deep dive into this. I'm wondering if this is going to be controversial or not. I don't think anything I'm saying is controversial, but we'll see what happens in the comments. So there was a video. I did where I talked about the worst interview I ever had, um, and in it I mentioned how excited I was to possibly work at a, at a big company, on a big IP. I mean, I've worked on some major IPS, but when I worked on them it was always 30, 50, maybe 100 people, nothing huge. Uh, the one time I got to work on something really, really big at carbine, there were other factors that led to that not working out. And, by the way, I've seen people say, uh, yeah, I don't think I'd like to work with Tim. What do these two things have in common? And this is where I think I'm going to start saying things and people are going to go: wait, here's the here's what I'm going to say.

To make something great, to make a really great game and not just a product. But a really great game — you need a great team. See any of my videos about Fallout and how lucky that we just got a great team.

And maybe it wasn't luck, maybe part of it was the filtering that happened at the beginning, where people had to come on their own time after hours, unpaid, to start coming up with IP ideas. I don't know.

All I know is Fallout was great. It was great to work on it, was a great team. It turned into a great IP and I think part of it was just great people working on was it was just great people working on it.

Here's the problem, if you take any element, any Game feature in a game and make it mediocre, you run the risk of that great game just becoming a good game, especially if, for the person playing it, that feature was really important. If someone really really cares about how good gun combat is, they may not like an RPG because the gun combats only if they really really want reactivity they may play an RPG and go: uh it's, not really responding to me and that's why they may not like MMO RPGs. If someone really wants to make their own character, to play through a story, an RPG that hands you a character is not going to be for them and it could be a great, game, but for them it's just mediocre because it's like I don't get to make my own character, I'm playing someone else's character idea and already it takes that great game and ratches it down. Now these are all elements that may not factor to your taste, but what I'm talking about is a game element that no one really likes.

It was done in a in a very half. You know, half-handed, half measure, and I think, and, trust me, I know I've read reviews of my own game where someone said, H this, they didn't they, phoned in this, or I didn't like this, I get it. So, trust me, I know the difference between something is to someone's taste and a feature wasn't done well for the majority of the people are playing it. So I'm just saying, if you want to make a great game, you have to have all the features be great, or a lot of them be really important ones, which requires a great team. Great teams are made up of great people and that means somewhere along the line someone had to select them.

There was judgment involved in that. I don't see any other way how you can put a team together without looking at their skills, judging them and deciding whether or not they're going to be on the team. This is how you make a great game and not just a product. So I see people complain, sometimes simultaneously, about getting judged, about crunch, about passion, a negative thing, and I get some of that argument. But I also want you to think of something: if you're going to want to make a really great game and you're really going to want to get good at what you're doing, you're going to have to experience some pain, some pressure, some discomfort — whatever you want to call it something, in order to get better, in order to hone your craft, which you have to do if you want to make a great game. Um — and by the way, here's a quick coraly um, just because you worked on a good game doesn't mean you were the reason it was good. I've had people say this about me. My response to that is: look at someone's entire body of work. If someone was involved in a lot of really good games, they may have been the person contributing it to it being good. Now, yeah, maybe they just got lucky and got involved in a series of good games.

Um, and the corat to that core, Larry, is what? If someone worked on a good game and then their, next ones weren't that good, maybe they were the reason it was good and then they got unlucky on the subsequent games and got put in with some teams who were just phoning it in. It's hard to tell, but I'm just saying if someone has a lot of good games under their boat, you could probably say they contributed to that, those games being good. The same way, if a band is really good, those band members probably contributed to all those good albums. And all those good songs, so what am I saying here? And — and this is kind of like a — it's becoming a — uh, a Meandering kind of discussion — I'm saying: if you want to make something great — not just good — but you want to make a great game, that is going to require a lot of effort. I don't see any shortcut in this, um, and when you put forth that effort, you also want to see it in other people around you putting forth that effort. You want to see the resulting game be really, really great, not just good.

So, yeah, there are people that I've worked with that I probably wouldn't want to work with again. Um, there are people who worked with me who probably wouldn't want to work with me again.

I get it. That's fine.

Um, I think the longer you work in any field, that's going to happen to You're going to collect a group of people that you would love to work with again and another group you're like: no, and it doesn't necessarily mean they're bad at what they did. It meant, in the context of you working together, what they contributed, what they worked on, maybe their skill set didn't align with and they just made kind of okay stuff.

Um, I know my earlier games. I was still learning stuff. I'm not super proud of a lot of the code in, you know, Grand Slam Bridge or B taale construction set, but I was still learning my craft and trying to figure out what I wanted to do. And then, when I finally decided that was RPGs, that's when I suddenly started coming up with: okay, I want reactivity, I want, um, systemic, uh reactivity rather than scripted reactivity. It's where I started honing the things that I like. That later.

On people started saying, well, that's a Tim Kane game. It feels like a Tim Kane game because it has these elements.

This is something you will have to do. You're going to have to figure out if you ever want, especially, to be in charge of a game. You're going to figure out what that is for you. What are the elements of a game that You want to be great, not good. You demand that they be great, and when you pick people to work on your team, you're going to have to judge them.

I don't see any way around this. You're going to have to look at their work, look at their skill set and judge them. And, yes, when you make your game to make it great, there's going to be some pressure points, there's going to be deadlines, there's going to be options not available to you because there's not enough money or there was no one available to put on your team that had the skill set of something you wanted, so you're going to have to substitute that feature with something else.

I've had to do that. Several do that. I've had to do that several times.

I guess my recommendation here the high level thing I'm trying to say is, when you're looking for work in the game industry, understand that for a while you're going to be looking for work that lets you hone your craft. Whatever you decide to do — whether you want to be a network programmer or an artist who specializes in, you know, bipedo animation, or you want to be a narrative designer and write good story in characters, whatever it is — it's going to take you a while to hone that craft. Once you do, you're going to want to work on something great and the only way I can see that happening is if you take an active effort and look for other great people to work with, potentially at big companies. So there's more money, so there's less um obstacles for you getting that great team together. The bottom line is: find your people and make something great. That's probably the best way I can think of handling creativity Under Pressure, which is find good people who are good at what they do and understand that to make a great product. There's going to be some discomfort involved, and that is my talk today on how to be a creative individual under pressure.
