+++
title = "Tropes"
date = "2023-08-18"
id = "BBaZHtlcHAU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about tropes, specifically tropes in computer role-playing games, including the ones"
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about tropes, specifically tropes in computer role-playing games, including the ones

I've used and the ones I haven't used because I hate them. Let's start with the first one: amnesia. I hate, this Trope so hard. And yes, I will say here what I told Chris Avalon about planescape torment: you get to use Amnesia once. I view Amnesia as kind of a hacky, lazy way of doing the start of an RPG, and I get why people do it. They want to make a character who doesn't know things, the same way the player doesn't know things. I think there's other ways to do it. I've done that in my own games.

When you were in Fallout, you left the Vault and you didn't know what was in the world. When you played Arcanum, you were taking a blimp ride to a new continent, so you didn't know what was going on there. So there's ways around it, but I mean, don't get me. Wrong, I loved um planescape torment, so I will just say what I said to Avalon is: use it once, but if you use it again, I will call you out as a lazy, hacky narrative designer. I think in some ways almost everybody wants to get it out of their system and once they do, that's it.

No more Amnesia, no more amnesiac characters. Fallout 2's original design by the original team that was doing it had the player waking up after being attacked by Bandits and beaten over the head and having all their gear stolen, and they had Amnesia. So this was a reason to reset the player to level one with no skills or perks or items. I did not like that. Neither did anyone else outside that team. It is part of the reason Fallout 2 got reassigned to me. That's how much people don't like amnesia. So game developers stop using amnesia.

Ah, okay, let's talk about some other tropes. I think I've used both of these.

Let's talk about the chosen one. A lot of RPGs like starting the player. As you know, he's the savior, he is going to be able to beat, defeat the bad guy or she's uh was mentioned in Prophecy and she's going to become the, main figure of our religion, of our culture or whatever. This is okay, but I like subverting it in every game. I did so in Fallout. The chosen one was sort of a subverted. We said: you everybody, Drew straws, and you drew the short. One part of the reason I wanted to introduce this is we had dumb dialogue and I couldn't think of any reason why The Vault would have selected an idiot to go out. Well, once you go out, you find out you're not the first.

Person to go out, because there's someone dead wearing a — uh, a vault jumpsuit right there at the door. So you find out you were not the first person to send out and if you're the dumb guy, you're probably not the last one they were planning to send out. They're gonna wait a few weeks.

Assume you were dead. Send someone else out. We did the same thing in Arcanum, but this time we ramped it up. That's why Virgil comes running up to you at the crash site.

It's what the prophecy said. He says: you're super important, you're the chosen one you're. He's been expecting you, and what I love is I love when you're playing a dumb dialogue character. You can tell people later: hey, Virgil said I was impotent. Um, so yeah, it's okay to use a Trope, especially if you play with it. Uh, there's another Trope. About being unrealistic.

Did this all the time? Fallout had radiation making Newton people and mutant scorpions and Newton, everything. We had bloody mess as a perk. That somehow, you take this perk and people explode. And when you shoot them, yeah, I, I don't mind unrealistic stuff, I, you could call it taking artistic license, I don't care, as long as the game is fun because of it. And once you do it, you have to be consistent. So I think that having the first few monsters say, oh, radiation did this, and then later on you have a bunch of normal animals living around radiation, yeah, so, just once you decide on it, just run with it, have fun, be consistent.

Um, I know one Trope that people consider is trophy is, uh, a gray morality in video games. Let me just say that that 25 years ago, this was not a Trope, no one was doing this, so we started it before it was a thing. I don't mean to be all hipster and say, oh it's cool before it was. I did that before it was cool.

But we did do great morality when everyone else was making the player forced to be the hero of the story. We liked that. You could be a bad guy and people would call you out for it, so I like that trope. There's another Trope I hear people talk about, ironically, talking a boss to death. Now we allowed that in a lot of our games — and by we I mean me and the team, because we talked about this at the very beginning, because it's always one of my design pillars that there are multiple ways to solve the main story quests. In Fallout there were three ways and one of them was dialogue, which meant there had to be way to talk your way through things like getting the water chip, killing the mutants at the military base and killing the master, and we tried to give them prerequis — prerequisites, like you couldn't just run straight to the master and say you should kill yourself. You at least had to have talked to re at the brother of Steel, and she sends you to do some, gather some data for her, and then she tells you that she's discovered the mutants are sterile. You can. She gives you a disc for your Pip Boy that has that information on it. Only then, if you have that at a real high speech skill, can you talk your way in the master of proving that his plan is going to work, and then he just kills himself. So I like to think that we did that. Trope Justice: um, I don't ever think you should just be able to walk up to somebody and go: I got a 20 speech, kill yourself. That's dumb, um.

Another Trope is the Trope of the heroic monster, and we did that sometimes. Um, Harold ghouls were supposed to be monsters and bad guys and, you know, not necessarily Heroes — I mean, the ones in the Acropolis aren't necessarily bad — but Harold was, you know, a heroic guy. In our first one he meant well, he tried to help people. Um, in Arcanum we had gar, the world's smartest orc.

Um, and yes, he's human, but you only find that out if you dig for it. But what I liked about that was, even though it's a Trope to have a heroic monster, it's kind of subverting the Trope that certain kinds of characters — Orcs, goals, super mutants — are always bad guys. So, part of our. Gray game design was we wanted these characters to be — some of them are heroes, the same way that some of the elves are bad. Just we wanted to play with that.

And then the final thing I wanted to talk about is Romance, this one's kind of like Amnesia, although I don't have that role, if you get one use. I don't like romance options in RPGs. I never got into them, although that didn't stop me putting in other features that I'm not that into. But I feel people want to do, but I think a lot of games don't do them well. And — and I agree with Leonard, because Leonard and I discussed this at length before we started out of Worlds — it takes a lot of work, a lot of narrative work and some Quest design and level design work to make romance options really a good choice in an RPG. You can't just glue them on, if you want to guarantee that people will hate your romance options, just try gluing them in and it's terrible. So I think if you're going to have them, they have to be really good and the characters have to be written to support them.

And at that point — now you're talking about all the different ways you can do romance options — can the player only romance someone of the opposite gender? Can there be same gender ones? Can the same player Romance, uh, people of multiple genders? Can that player romance more than one person?

These are all decisions you have to make and once you make that decision one way, I guarantee you there are people are like: well, I don't really want that. You know like, okay, the people who don't want same-sex romance options, their view it as well. Now you took all these. Potential Companions and I can't woo them because I'm the wrong gender. So then you end up with games that let everybody woo everyone all the time and then it stops feeling like romance is even a thing. It just feels kind of like a bad dating simulator. So these are things that I never got into and I just didn't really want them in my game. So we just took them out of The Outer Worlds and put it in by letting pavardi have a romance with another NPC, and you can facilitate, but you don't have to, so let's see. So the tropes basically I talked about were Amnesia — I hate — Chosen One, unrealistic mechanics, gray morality, talking bosses to death and the Rogue monster. I've used all those and I like them. Romance options.

Eh, I don't personally like it I don't put it in my game because I think it takes too much uh, resources to do. Right, if you like them and you want to put them in your game, knock yourself out. Just do a good job with It's very easy to screw that up. Okay, I think that's everything I have to say about tropes.
