+++
title = "Interplay After Hours Game Playing"
date = "2023-06-09"
id = "bcr3mMStEOE"
status = "production"
tags = ["Interplay", "Game Design", "Storytime"]
summary = "I talk about how my game playing really ramped up after starting at Interplay full time, and how those games influenced my own game development."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone, it's Tim. In previous videos I've talked about playing D&D and GURPS and LP MUDs. In this video I want to talk about how my game playing really took off when I started at Interplay. Now I thought I was a game player as a kid, you know, in high school and college, but nothing prepared me for just how much game playing went on at Interplay after I started. Now this is pretty much after I got hired, so in early 92 to about when Fallout kicked into high gear in 95, which also corresponds to about the time we switched buildings.

Interplay had four buildings in the six years I was there: Susan, Fitch, Alton, and Von Carmen. By far the most game playing I remember doing was in the Fitch Building, probably because by the time we moved to Alton it was hard to get everybody together, and in Von Carmen we were just, you know, noses to the grindstone on Fallout. The Susan building, which was where I was originally hired into, I was upstairs in a foyer, um, stuck between two producers. People from QA would shoot paper clips at me, including Eric DeMille, who would later on become producer on Fallout 2, my producer at Carbine and at Obsidian.

He's only 18, so cut him some slack, um, he and a bunch of other people were. When you came to Interplay at night, there were always people there. You could drop by Interplay at 10 pm on a random day, Sunday night. There would be people there, sometimes they were working, sometimes they were just playing. By the time we got to the Fitch Building, though, I think the reason things really took off is everybody was in one building, big L-shaped building, and there was a wonderful conference room that had a big circular table, which was perfect for gaming.

There was also a racquetball court, and I'd play racquetball a lot at UCI, so I started a racquetball newsletter. I called myself Dr. Racket Head. We had a ladder; people would play and tell me who won, and I'd adjust the ladder every week. But what that meant was I was mailing a lot of people I didn't normally talk to. I mean, there were times I was pretty good at racquetball. Sometimes I was on the top tier, even in the top slot. But there was an accountant, Larry Fukoca, and one of the VPs, Phil Adam, who could crush me every game, and I actually like that because it's fun to play with people who are so good. I learned so much just watching them crush me. So that was fun, but it also meant I met a lot more people. I was being a lot more social than I normally was.

We started playing lots of different games, not just role-playing games, but board games, card games, dice games. We had done it a little bit in the Susan building. I kind of remember playing Wiz. War a little bit in that building. It was a little board game that you assemble the board. I've talked about it. Wizards try to collect Treasures or kill other Wizards. We played it so much more when we moved to the Fitch Building, and we played it so much that we started inventing our own cards. We invented so many that we mailed them back to Jolly Games. Tom Jolly made the original Wiz. War and then went to Chess X, but we mailed them all of our instructions for the cards and that was fun. I mean, we were just so into it. That was the time I was making all my group's apps: the star system generator, the character editor. We actually had a weekly meeting called the Thursday night thing. Now, like I said, you could come any day there, any day of the week, and there would be people there. But Thursday night thing was kind of a planned thing. Everybody would stop at around seven-thirty, go out and grab food, and we'd meet back in the conference room around that big round table and we would play games. Every week it felt like we just did different things.

A huge thing was playing with Atari Lynxes, which was a really cool little handheld color multiplayer. Most of their games could support multiplayer for five or six. Some of them, like Todd's Adventures in Slime World, could go up to eight.

We played those games so much that we had developed a pattern to how to connect our wires together. Because they were wired, they weren't wireless. If everybody brought a cord, we would call a star pattern, where everybody just threw it into the center and we connected them together. That meant it was easy for people to leave because they could just unplug theirs and connect to the two neighbors.

However, there was one person, Wes Yanagi, who wouldn't buy a cable. So when he came we had to do a ring pattern, where everybody connected to the person to the right and it went around, and then for n people to do a ring you only needed n minus one cords. Yes, we got really nerdy about figuring out patterns of connection. We played so many of these multiplayer games. Multiplayer wasn't that big in PC, there were a few multiplayer games, I mean Doom and Quake were coming into their own, but it was so much fun to play these little Lynx games with each other and we played a ton of Wiz. War.

We also played Bomberman on this NES. We had this NES multitap that connected to the second-player port, which let four more people join so you could have five people play one game. Now the American Bomberman only had four people. They would start in each corner. The Japanese Bomberman not only had different characters, but there was a fifth person who could start in the middle. We played that game so much. We had terms: if you, when you started, usually were in a corner and you could only go left or right, if you dropped your bomb before you went left to right, it would blow up down those two hallways and kill yourself. We called that corner heading. We had all these terms. Everybody had favorite characters. It was a great multiplayer game because so many people could play it at once and if there were more than five people, a game only lasted a few minutes and we had rules like, if there were a lot of people waiting, if you won, you stayed and the other four people had to get up and let four other people join. Sometimes we only had one or two people waiting and then the rule was they took the position of whoever died first in the round, which was sometimes hard to tell because one bomb could take out multiple people at the same time.

That was also my first experience with supers. I played GURPS Supers, but we played Champions, which was a tabletop role-playing game. It's only about supers. I still remember my character, I think Spencer Kip, who was originally going to be the lead artist on Fallout. He ran the session, but I wanted a character who just had luck. I was fascinated by luck, and I think this is what influenced me wanting luck in Fallout. There were so many levels of luck you could buy that that determined how frequently and how good your luck was. I had this character buy them all: luck, ridiculous luck, extraordinary luck, super luck. He had all of them effectively. What that meant was every time he rolled, he'd roll three times and take the best. If anyone attacked him, they'd take three rolls and take the worst.

Now, to buy all this luck was really expensive because they made it very expensive. This is a powerful ability. My character had to take a lot of disadvantages. I had him take youth. He was 14. Poor, missing leg, missing arm, missing eye, and, and this is in the rules, so no offense to anyone, and yes, I had speech therapy as well. When I was in the lunch school stuttering, his name was Lucky Boy. Everyone was afraid of Lucky Boy. Even the other superheroes were afraid, so we kind of had a rule. We all belonged to a city superhero council. I forget what we called it. When a villain would attack the city, the other superheroes would shoot off to that villain. They'd fly, they'd teleport, they'd run at super speed, leaving Lucky Boy at the headquarters. Now, Lucky Boy couldn't drive. He didn't have a driver's license. He was 14, but lucky, and he was poor. But Lucky Boy had a bus pass so he would get on the bus, often having to take transfers. So Lucky Boy would always arrive late, and our rule was: if the other heroes could take care of the villain before Lucky Boy got there, great. If the villain was still rampaging by the time Lucky Boy arrived, everybody backed up. Lucky Boy would get off the bus and just walk up to the building and, like, try to punch him or something.

Now, keep in mind, Lucky Boy would often get critical. So even though he wasn't strong and he was missing an arm and he had to hop over with he only had a missing leg and he couldn't afford prosthetics because he was poor, he would punch him and often get a critical, and it would say like knock him down or knock him back. Eventually the villain would get really mad and aim one of his attacks at Lucky Boy. That was the villain's huge mistake. They'd roll three times. They'd almost always fail, but they would usually critically fail. Heat beams would get reflected back onto the villain. Things they'd throw they'd drop and hurt themselves. Grenades they'd throw would slip and explode at their feet. If they had other, like super breath or any other superpowers, it would somehow malfunction and mess them up several times. Villains would basically hurt themselves. The other superheroes would just sit back and let them knock themselves out, but occasionally they'd get so hurt from Lucky Boy that one of the other superheroes could just come up and go, okay, I've grabbed you.

That was the funniest character. It was also fun because the DM got to figure out how Lucky Boy's luck manifested. I loved it. It went into Fallout. That's my point of this entire story.

You never know where your ideas are going to come from. You never know what hobby, what fun activity, something you didn't plan to do but your friends are doing and you do it too. I did a whole talk about how Disneyland inspired my level design. You just never know. Part of your brain is always going to be going day and night, at work, after hours, at Disneyland. I love that part of design, that there's some part of your brain that's always thinking about things and chewing on stuff. If you want to be a designer, all I can say is stay open to that.

Don't focus just on video games. Don't focus just on the genre of video games you make. I make RPGs, but I play a lot of different things. You never know what element you're going to see somewhere that will inspire you in your game, and who knows, you may be the first person to do that in your game genre. You might not, but you might have a new and fresh take on it. That's what's important. So, yeah, this really long set of stories had that as its motto, which is just stay open, keep yourself open to all the different experiences you have and see how that can work in your games, because it will.
