+++
title = "Publisher Contracts"
date = "2024-07-15"
id = "BObrovcTZZw"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Publishing", "Contracting"]
summary = "I talk about some do's and don'ts of negotiating contracts with publishers."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about contracts, specifically the contracts you make with Publishers to make games.

And this is a response to TS 7901 who asked I would like to, who said I would like to hear more of the business side of your stories. So here we go now. Let me put a big caveat at the beginning of this. Bear in mind I don't think I'm a good businessman. I do not think that I particularly ran the side of tra well and not like the accounting, paying bills side, but the dealing with Publishers and getting good contract side. So take a lot of this with a grain of salt, but also take it with uh from The View that I often think I learn more from failure than success and I pretty much failed here. So I know some things to look out for. But anyway, let me start by talking about Publishers. Publishers are not your enemy. I know a lot of you like to immediately take the employer bad, publisher bad, everything, bad side, so let me just say they're not your enemy, they are your partners. You are trying to make a product with them.

However, they're not your friend. Um, they're not, even though they may try to say things like: yeah, we're just friends here.

Can't you just add this feat, teacher? Can't you just do this?

They're not your enemy, they're not your friend, they're your business partners. As a business partner, they're trying to spend the least amount of money for the most amount of product.

That just makes sense. You do that yourself when you shop, and you, if you look at a price, if you decide between two products based on price, you're doing it. So just bear in mind, though, that there are other things that should factor in, like quality and convenience, and these are things that should factor in to the contract. If they're coming to you because they know you're good at this particular genre of thing and they want a high quality game, or you already have an engine for this, you've already done a game similar to it, you have people already on staff that know how to do this.

That's convenience. They should be paying for that. They should be paying for experience and for Speed or whatever it is they're trying to ask for. So this, when you go back and forth with them, just know that that other thing should factor in, other than price, money. Also, they will want to own everything. They W want to own the code, the art, the entire intellectual property rights, future rights to things to be done with the IP, if they don't own it — and I'll talk about that. So these are things you can negotiate. You can keep one and not the other, um, and these are things that you should try to do. Um, one last thing about publisher. Before I move on from that — and I'll talk more about how to negotiate for things other than money: um, keep in mind that they're going to handle things that you can't handle or don't want to handle, and those are things like localization into other languages, marketing, especially World marketing, because you'll have to have ads in different languages and also different things can be in Those ads, and they marketing — their marketing department — should know all this.

Um, however, what Publishers bring to the table is less than they used to like. They used to handle printing the boxes and the discs and distributing them to physical stores, and that's just not done anymore. So they bring less to the table than they used to, and you should be aware of that. Um, finally, though, bear in mind they're paying you. They are giving you money, so you will have to give up some things. Like you know, you're not autonomous, if you make this with your own dime, you can decide to do whatever you want, but you're going to have to give up some of that decision — making if you want them to pay you.

So this is how I kind of VI pubs: not an enemy, not a friend. They're a business partner, so, when you negotiate with them, keep in mind that you want to negotiate for more than just money. You want to keep some of the things that are up for negotiation, like I mentioned. Like you may want to keep the code or the art, or you may own the intellectual property. Maybe you own the intellectual property, but they have the right to make the sequel. You know the first sequel, so they're getting and paying you to make this game. Yeah, you own the intellectual property, but the this, the first sequel, will be made by them if they want it, and I'll talk about that.

Um, in the past we've managed to do that. I've mentioned that for Arcanum at troa, for the very first game we made with Sierra, we owned the code. They owned the IP and all the artwork, which is why I can't use any of that — but we owned the code and that turned out to be extraordinarily useful when we got approached by Atari to make a d and d game, because we already had an isometric engine and a ton of hook — you know, points hooking into it for doing, uh, RPG systems. So we just removed the Arcanum rolles and added D and boom, we had Temple.

Yes, it wasn't that easy, but it was easier than starting from scratch. So just be aware that when you negotiate, try to keep some things and when you give up others. Now I do want to talk about two things that you should be super cautious about, which I messed up on, so you need to watch this. First of all, be aware of the keyman clause, and I googled it is called keyman. It probably should be called key person, but a keyman clause is a list of people by name that are required to be working on this project and only this project. This is not um, a non-compete clause, which, is when you leave a company, they can keep you from working on something similar or for a competitor. This is a, basically a contract that says: when you're working on this, is all you're going to work on now, keyman Clauses are there, for a reason. If you stop being on the project, the publisher can treat that as a breach, and a breach means the contract is over. They can walk away with anything that's already been done and you may even have to pay a penalty. The reason I want you to avoid this at all costs is there's so much you can't control over keyman Clauses. If they want to keyman one of your employees, you can't prevent the employee from quitting. You can try to throw more money at them, you can try to beg them to stay, but if someone wants to leave, you have no control over it and you can't sue them for the economic distress of they would cause by leaving. Well, you can sue them for anything and you can try, but they don't. They didn't sign anything. You did, so be very careful signing away, keyman. Uh contract. Have keyman Clauses for anyone who's an employee if it's a fellow owner or founder of the company.

Okay, I mean, I I still think you want to avoid it. If they absolutely demand this, then use that as leverage for other things. Maybe you get to keep the code or the art or the intellectual property rights, but if they want this, you've got to get something in exchange.

Similarly, there's another Clause that I was unaware of but now I'm very aware of, called the last right of refusal. Last right, not first right, Last Ride of refusal means the publisher is allowed to, let's, say, you own the, IP, but they have last right of refusal on the squel. What that means is if the game does really well and you want to make a squel, they can match anyone's offer. They don't have to make the, first offer, but they're all. But they reserve the right to make the last offer. So after you collect all these offers from other Publishers who may want to put out this game, they can offer something and as long as it at least matches your best offer, they win automatically.

It's part of the contract. It's called Last Ride of refusal, now, just what you need to be aware of — which I did not — is some Publishers won't deal with you. They won't. They just refuse to come to the table if it involves a last Vari of refusal, because they're like: why would we go all the way through this negotiation process just to have some third party step in and go: yeah, we'll give you the same thing and they automatically lose and they can up their offer and the other company go: okay, we match that too. They just don't want to bother. It's a. They view that as a waste of their time.

So if you get, if one of the things you got in your contract, if maybe you won the intellectual property rights but the publisher kept Last Ride of refusal on the sequel, keep in mind it's going to be very hard to find another publisher. So the other thing you have to watch for is contracts usually contain the right for the publisher to terminate them at any time, and that seems kind of unbalanced. But since they're On's paying, they may like not have money and they can't continue paying you, so they're just allowed to terminate it. Termination is different than breach. Termination is them going the contract's over. We're just going to walk away.

We keep some stuff. You keep some stuff.

Breaches — you did something terrible. There's a penalty associated with it, so just so you know, the termination Clauses — depending on what they are combined with, that last varet of refusal are really horrible things to have in the contract. So try to add a penalty for them terminating without cause. So if they just run out of money or for whatever reason, just decide we're not going to continue, off this, make sure there's some termination Clause, like if they walk away, they have to pay you, like the next three milestone in payment, or you the IP rights revert to you. If they terminate the contract without a breach, you keep the rights and you can — just you can put that out there and if they re they don't want to do that, you like, well, you're not going to terminate without cause, so this will never happen, right, so you might be able to get the rights that way. But let me just make sure that that you understand: if there's a breach clause — and a breach Clause is, you do something that lets them terminate with cause. Make sure that that breach Clause is as objective as you can make it, something like you delivered the Milestone more than 10 days late. Do not make it subjective, like they just decided they didn't like it because they can always say that they could make anything subjective into a breach clause and then, oh, we didn't like it. Or you know, you put something in that we think is going to.

People are going to find offensive, so we are marking you in breach and walking away. Now that's why keyman is very you want to avoid it because it's a very objective thing. They can go: hey, this person isn't working at your company anymore. You've breached the reason. Another reason you want to keep: it objective is there are a lot of things that can happen that again, like the, keyman Clause that you have no control over. So if, they breach — because you know maybe a license got lost or the price of a license went up that you have to pay for — like maybe you're using a, cinematic movie player that you bought from a third party, the price goes up and they're like, oh well, we're breaching over that — that be a terrible thing to happen. So you want to have those breach claws be spelled out and try to keep them as objective as possible.

I think that's all the things about contracts. I mean, there's a lot of other things. You should have a good lawyer, have a lawyer, review it — don't just listen to me, um, but I would say those are the big things. I'd be concerned.

About when you're entering into a contract with a publisher. I mean there's a lot of other things: what percentage you get in royalty and when those kick in, and all the other rights you're going to be negotiating. But those are the big ones. I think that what I've just said, so hopefully this will help you if you're going to be negotiating with a publisher on a contract.
