+++
title = "Durability Mechanics"
date = "2023-09-16"
id = "BPzMDnev_hE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "I talk about item durability and why those mechanics are used in many RPGs."
references = []
+++

Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to answer another question about weapon durability — ice dog 111 asks: I was wondering if you could do a video about weapon durability or equipment durability as a game mechanic.

Is it an outdated mechanic or is it still valid? PS who came up with the weapon to storing golems in Arcanum, the Black Mountain Clan mines? Gollum Gauntlet still gives me nightmares. Okay, okay, I'm going to answer that last question first, but I'm gonna put a big caveat on it I don't have any note that specifically says who did it, but my brain hole tells me with 90 certainty it was Chad Moore. I believe he did most of the Black Mountain plan Minds, so I think he put that in there. It's not a system mechanic in the game. The breakage — it was put as a script on the golems and our source control — we used. The version that I have that I preserved in my archive — doesn't say who did it doesn't. Have the first person to check it in or the last person to check it in. All I have is my name, because I ended up making a copy of the latest version of that archive, the shipped version. So I don't know for sure, but I think it was Chad Moore. Anyway, let's talk about weapon or equipment durability in general. I don't think it's outdated.

In fact, I had it in The Outer Worlds. Um, it was interesting, though. I understand the controversy, there were people on our design team who wanted it removed. They begged me to remove it. They hated it. They said it was frustrating and terrible and but, the other thing is many of those same people wanted me to get rid of ammo too. They didn't want ammo in the game. They wanted, once you pick up a weapon, any kind of weapon, ranged melee, anything. It just worked forever, so there was no such thing as anything needing a power cell to run or anything needing ammo or bullets, which I did not agree with and I'll talk about that. But I also think that in many ways the durability in The Outer Worlds was way too easy. I've heard people say that they didn't like it or when they started the game, like, oh, it's got durability. And I've seen people post, oh, I don't want to play this game because it has durability. But I've seen so many people go: once you get started, it's not something big to worry about.

I think the reason I think we made it too easy is any weapon could be scrapped into weapon parts. Then you could use to repair any other weapon in hindsight. I really like the Fallout method, where a one weapon repairs a like. Weapon, so you are encouraged. You're actually happy when you find duplicate drops because you're like, oh good, it's a 45 pistol, I can use that to repair the 45 pistol I'm using.

That. I really like, especially if you have a modded one. You can just use on modded ones to keep it repaired. I like that. It also has the really cool thing: if you find a really rare, weapon, either you can't find a similar weapon to repair it with or they themselves are rare and then you're forced to pay to have it repaired and I like that and I'll talk about why I like that so I get that it's controversial and it frustrates some, players.

But let's talk about durability in general and the pros and cons of using it. So I'll go over the pros first. First off, weapon durability encourages a theory very thoughtful. Use of weapons. There's a lot of people who just pick up a weapon in the game and it does seems to do a lot of damage, and then they use it for everything, for the rest of the game, even though, that weapon may not be good against certain armor types or certain creature types, they never bothered to learn it.

They're just like I have this machine gun. Everything gets shot with my machine gun. If weapon durability introduces that that you will wear down a weapon.

People are kind of forced to go. Okay, when should I use this weapon is good against lightly armored people or creatures that don't have thick armor. That leads to the second Pro, which is it encourages players to use a variety of weapons in a game, once you learn that weapons wear out even if you don't go. Into that thoughtful mode of I'm going to look at exactly what weapons do and try to choose the best weapon for a particular combat — you will still be forced to use a variety when your favorite weapon breaks and then you have to go to the next, the, next weapon you have in your inventory. This is also why I like ammo, because sometimes you can put a really cool weapon in the game. You can introduce it, but ammo is scarce at that point. So people will use it, but they can't use it for everything.

And then later in the game, when it's on par with the creatures you encounter, the ammo can become more common, and that's also a great way to support different character types. If you have a character who has specialized in crafting, maybe he can make the rare ammo for it, so he hasn't spent his points. In combat, but he has spent points in crafting and now he can make that rare ammo.

So it's that kind of balance why you have so many levers like this you can pull, in fact, let me go into that and I, by the way, I could do a whole topic on what I'm about to talk about, which is money sayings versus money sources. I could do a whole video on that.

There's a whole like section of system design, which is game economics, where big enough games usually hire a game designer who does nothing but that game's economics. This is especially true in MMOs, because when you have a large MMO with both a large player base and its long, long term running, it's a game of service, so you'll be playing it for years. Economy is super important.

It's one thing to end up playing a single player game. With a million coins. It's very different to end up with a million coins in an MMO like wow. Because they have player economies, players trade things, players go to the auction house. Once money becomes devalued, it just turns back into a barter system. So the reason I like weapon and just general equipment durability is it is a great money sync. It is a thing that the player has to think of all the time, because every player, even the non-combat ones, will eventually have to use a weapon. You know you, can't, you know, persuade A rad Scorpion or an auto mechanical not to attack you.

And it's also a money sink in a way that you're that isn't as obvious in the sense of if you have to pay to get an item repaired or to buy parts to repair an item, it's an obvious money sink. But it's also a uh, passive money sync in the sense of when you find an item — and this is true for Fallout or The Outer Worlds — that you would normally have sold to make money, but you either keep it in Fallout because you're going to use it to repair another weapon or you break it down in The Outer Worlds into weapon parts that you can then use to repair their weapons. That is something that you didn't sell, so it makes the item drops, add less money into the economy. So in effect, they ask: act like a money sink, because you're not, they're not generating money, they're not a money Source anymore.

Now you know, I think that we could have made the like, I said, the The Outer Worlds one. I would have preferred to maybe do the Fallout one in hindsight. But even if I hadn't done that, I think weapon parts either should have not dropped as their own item and only be something that you get when you tear apart a weapon — and maybe not all the time, and they're expensive in a store, and that way they're more valuable. I know a lot of people say day in the game with enough weapon parts to repair all their weapons 10 times over, and I, yes, that happened in QA. It was one of the things that happened in game development, where you're getting near the end of the game and you have to prioritize bugs. Money syncs and sources are not the same as crashes and combat imbalances and they tend to get prioritized lower. So that's why you see so many games out there that are very unbalanced economically. It's because it just doesn't matter, now I get the negative. Weapon and Equipment durability frustrates some. Players. I get that.

The thing is — and this is something I always talk about with new designers: you probably can't name a feature that doesn't frustrate some group, subgroup of players. Which means if your goal is to make a game with no feature that no player dislikes, you will fail. So your goal is that, even if you're frustrating a player — and, by the way, one player's frustration is another player's challenge — come up with a way that they can either ameliorate it so it doesn't really affect them, they can make a character that's not affected by this perfect example. Stealth and talk characters in my games are less affected by weapon durability because they literally don't use them as often they're not using their weapons, they're not their armors, and getting struck as often doesn't affect them as much as long as you have those amelioration paths for any frustration. I think it's good.

Let me talk about a game that's not mine, breath of the wild, which I played and liked. I have a switch — super fun.

It has an extreme example of durability in that weapons in that game degrade with no real way to repair. Yes, I get that there are some special ways to repair limited types like the rock. OCTA rocks can repair Rusty weapons and there's a few others, but when I played the game I didn't know any of those. The game certainly doesn't tell you about them. So that's a game that the designers expect you to use a weapon Until It Breaks and then move on. They're forcing you to be thoughtful in how you use your weapon and use a variety, but it's a very extreme example of weapon durability. I don't think that game suffered in any way. It certainly was popular and sold a lot of units.

Yes, there are people who complain about it, but find me a game where no one complains about any feature in it I would like to hear about that game and I would like to learn from that game's design, because I've never found such a game, so I just wanted to throw that out there as okay. Here's an example of a game I didn't make that I think is great. That has this feature that frustrates people. So we have that. The bottom line with weapon durability is it slots in to what I mentioned about game economics and the bottom line that I want to make here is every game needs money, syncs and money sources and they have them in an effort not to frustrate players. Most games, especially single player games, fall into the too many sources, not enough syncs category, but every game has syncs, every system mechanic that leads to those things is something that will frustrate some subgroup of players, and you simply have to pick and choose what you want to do in your game.

Pick some of those challenges, slash frustrations, come up with some ways to ameliorate it and move on. I think that's the best you can do and I don't think there's any way to avoid it, and because of that I don't think equipment durability is an outmoded idea. I think there are other ways to do economic balancing, but it's one tool in the economic tool chest and that's what I think of that.
