+++
title = "Onboarding New Team Members"
date = "2025-03-05"
id = "BQ3Wpfp5NYE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Management", "Production"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about onboarding new team members."
references = ["lgajXqRVwdw", "IADSh_P05As"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about onboarding new team members.

This is from a question from pooa 8730 who asked looking at Team growth. In those photos they were talking about a video I posted of uh development during Fallout. I'll put — I'll link it below: how difficult was it to onboard new people? You need to get new people up to speed as fast as possible and they clearly have no knowledge of existing implemented things, especially in Game Dev where deadlines are super tight. Interesting question. This is another one of those questions where I never would have thought to do a video on this until someone asked, because getting people up to speed is just part of what you always did and so, like a fish surrounded by water, it didn't occur to me that I was wet. But I do want to say this — and this isn't uh directed to the person who made the comment, but just something I've noticed is onboarding. When I hear that term, it always makes me smile a little bit because it's one of those terms that have snuck into game development from other places and it makes me realize how much influence is coming in from these places. We never used to use onboarding as a term. In fact, I don't even think I heard that term before 10 years ago, and I certainly didn't hear it frequently until about 5 years ago — and suddenly everything's about or onboarding.

We got a onboard board our team members. We have to make a document called on onboarding the new team members and I'm like: aren't we just supposed to bring them up to speed like we've always done? It's not like we've never not done these things that I'm going to tell you about.

It's just now. There's a corporate term for It's like when suddenly developers who I sat next to started throwing around terms like aru, and I'm like: are you what? And they're like: no, AR, you, the average revenue per user. You, we just got to start measuring how much money that the average customer brings in. And I'm like, well, we sell the game for $50.

No, because once you go live or once you have microtransactions, and I was like, uh, it's it, and sometimes it's not just a term from business. In the last few years, I've started hearing the, adjective bespoke. I had to go look it up.

Um, it means, you know, uniquely made, handcrafted or artisanal or something. And I realized that until about 20 years ago, everything was bespoke. Every game I made, you made everything: the engine, all the art, all the tools, everything. And when everything's bespoke, you don't need a word like bespoke. It's only recently where you grab a game engine on a shelf and you grab your sound library off the shelf and your, uh, all your tools are purchased off the shelf. There's very little that you make in House.

Suddenly. That very little is the bespoke thing. So why am I talking about all this?

When I'm talking today about onboarding, what I'm telling you is what I used to do to bring new team members up to speed on the game we were developing. Now this is called onboarding. To me that is a very weird corporate term, very sterile, very. There's probably a, document, you know, there's a folder somewhere like how to onboard people. Anyway, let's let me talk about how I used to bring people up to speed on my projects. This, always was something you had to do, but it didn't seem like as big of a problem in the past. I don't know why, maybe it's because this whole industry was new. It was new to everybody, so we were all figuring things out together.

Maybe it's because teams were smaller and cohesion is just a lot more natural a small team. Once you get a bigger team, there's more likely you're going to have people who kind of want to do things differently or aren't thinking of exactly what the game is you're making, or have different experiences. And also back then, like in the 80s and 90s, they're just weren't a lot of games to reference. So if you did talk about a game, even if everyone on the team hadn't played it, they almost certainly had heard of it because there just weren't that many games. Now there are so many games. I think I've mentioned steam this year is: look, looking at 25,000 games going, on to steam every year, and of course there are games that aren't. On Steam, there are indie games and games that are on Epic or Gog that aren't on Steam.

There's a lot of games coming out and it's hard to reference them and expect everyone on your team to know what you're talking about also: um, back then assets were made a lot faster, whether it was art or code features or design documents. So when something got added to the game, that addition was noticed really quickly because you like, hey, that wasn't there yesterday and now it's there today. You didn't see any buildup to It's like all of a sudden people are walking around or all of a sudden death animations are in or something like that. So it's very fast to give feedback, because if you give feedback on something that literally just went in the day before, it's fresh in the mind of who, whoever just put it in. But these days pipelines are so long that, just to use art as an example, you may want a death animation and well, does the, does the model, You may have to make a model and then texture it and then rig it and then animate it and then it gets put in one of many maps and you may not see that death animation because it may be unique to a particular weapon that you don't get half until halfway through the game. So it may be a long time before feedback happens on that death animation. And if that death animation has to do with the model and not the animation, like we wish the, we wish the model was more, um, complex, maybe it had more polygons, we could support a much cooler looking death animation. That model may have been made months or maybe even a year or. More before, so there may be a long time to get feedback in Loop. So that's just something else that's changed too.

So let's talk about the methods by which I've tried to bring people up to speed when they get hired onto my teams. The first one is by using your leads. The leads have people assigned to them and they're supposed to be watching what the people on their team are doing. If the leads are all on the same page — and I I hope they are it's. I've worked on a game before where the lead artist and lead designer and lead programmer were not all making the same game, and that's hard. But if, assuming they're all coherent and agree in agreement on what they're making, the leads can watch their own people's work to make sure that early on in whatever the pipeline is, that those things are going.

In, they can be checked and you don't have to wait until something has already been in the game for months before someone notices, hey, this mesh isn't dense enough or this model isn't rigged correctly to let us do these animations we want to do now. Another way this is done, this kind of onboarding is done, is guidelines are usually created for code, for narrative, for art. They're wildly different, guidelines. Um, we've made guidelines for level designers that explain how we want line of sight and how points of interest pois should work in the in the levels and things people should look at in other games to get an idea of how we want our levels to be. And that would be very different than what an art guideline would be, where it may reference a movie and say: we're trying to capture this kind of look, but we're not going. For that movie's dialogue choices, for that go to this book or this TV show or this movie. We went dialogue like that, so all of these can be very different guidelines that should still come together cohesively in the game, often the examples of existing. You give examples of existing work that's already in the game. So, for example, you may a code guideline may have.

Here's how we want you to name variables or methods in objects. Here's an example object from the game. We there be a guide down on how to write characters. You know we want them to have a certain style in how they talk and how they greet you and how quests are given out, and it could be as specific as in any particular node where an NPC say says something, there can't be more than five PC responses. Give an example of guidelines for that. Similarly, art may give examples of here's, here, stills from a game or a TV show or a movie. We want to look like This is why I loved it when we went from paper and pencil things to um internal tools like Confluence, where you could embed images or even movies and show people rather than describe what art Nuvo, I'm slowly learning the difference between art nvo and Art Deco.

It's only taking me decades you can show people. This is Art Novo. We want it to look like this.

One thing we commonly do is we recommend other works to for the people to go out and actually experience. So there have been on several games where, depending on where you were hired, I would say it would really be behoove you to go play this game, because this is really what we're shooting at. Books were used. As examples of narrative shows and movies were used for narrative and art and other games are used for everything, and we really, really ask people to go home and watch that movie or watch that TV show, or it would help if you could read this book or if you could play this game. These days we even give people, in the first week or two you're hired, take time out to do this. Go watch 15 minutes of this TV show, go watch this movie, play this game, and we expect you to do it, you know, at work, because that's part of the onboarding process, and we're give you the, movie or the game in question to play. By the way, later on, when anybody on the team gets asked by press — and they will — what were the influences on this game?

You've got your answer, just think back to when. You got onboarded and go: oh, this is the. These were the influences. By the way, it's kind of an inside joke, uh, for anyone in game development who gets influ, who gets interviewed frequently by the press, that that question — what were your influences — that's kind of like the most vanilla base generic question you can possibly be asked because that journalist — I shouldn't say journalist because a lot them AR journalists anymore — that interviewer didn't do much research because you can ask anybody that I love when people say, hey, how does this game differ in its approach to this as opposed to this last game you did? That shows that they're actually Lo.

Looked a bit at the game, looked up my past games and they're asking for a Delta, which should give their readers a lot or viewers a lot better idea of what to expect than just the generic what were your influences on this game? But guess what? You're going to be asked that so you can remember back to your onboarding and go: oh, these are the shows and movies and books and other games that we referenced when we were making this game. Another thing I want to point out here is, depending on when people get hired, you may already have developed a prototype for them to check out the system: mechanics in Action, a beautiful corner for them to see, finished art in a level or vertical slice which is an entire level for them to play, which is at almost near shipping, quality in mechanics, in level, layout, in narrative, in art. So, depending on people, when people are brought on board, you may have already gotten things done in the game that you may want to make part of the onboarding process.

So those are all the things. We do, but let me throw out a few risks in onboard boarding. You're doing all this onboarding because you want your game to be consistent and, like I've said, there's nothing worse than a game that's made by a bunch of people who are trying to make a different game. But you don't want to do this onboarding in a way that will squash new ideas. One of the cool things about hiring new people is they will play the game with a fresh set of eyes that nobody else on the team has, and they may — they may notice something, they may have a suggestion. They may have just played another game that solves an issue that you guys had that.

You're just like, we're just going to accept it, this is how it goes, and they're like, oh, I saw this UI that does this better, or I saw an AI. That had this interesting Behavior, maybe we could do that too. So you, want your guidelines to be a lot of examples, with an over overarching kind of coherent rule, but you don't want rigid rules, because that may squash new ideas. Now you may have a rule that seems very specific and very rigid. I gave an example, like in any particular dialogue node, you can't have more than five player responses. Well, that may be because your UI can't support more than five, or you didn't want to scroll, or you may have a tool that prevents more than five.

This is all great, but sometimes you're going to have someone come on board and goes. I saw a game that had six or seven or 10, or you know. They had a lot of different player responses and it was really cool and people really seem to like it. Which may make you go back and examine why you're being rigid on that point and how hard it would be to relax that, if not in this game, then you can put it on your list of like. Hey, here are some things we might want to try to do on the sequel. When we have more time, maybe we can have seven responses, or 10, or an unlimited number, and just there's a little scroll bar and you just keep scrolling until there you've exhausted all your possible responses. These are examples of things that may come up from onboarding someone: a great idea that either you can change the game you're making or make a note that a sequel or whatever your next game is.

Maybe there's a better way of doing this. So I hope this answered your question. Po Doha 8730.
