+++
title = "Troika's Conan The Barbarian Proposal"
date = "2024-05-27"
id = "BsZC8A_XB_k"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Troika Games", "RPG Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about another game proposal I made."
references = ["dz6mHKFEAdU", "2ig9tS5Fsx4"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about another game proposal I made.

This is back in June of 2004. I'll talk about why I made it and what it was, but it was for. It was for the Conan, the Barbarian RPG. Um, I was doing some going through my files for reasons, and I found all kinds of interesting things, um, but one of the things I assembled across were was a cache of a bunch of proposals that we had written when vampire, the uh Masquerade bloodlines was winding down. I've talked about one of them, the B's Gate 3 proposal, but this was one I totally forgot about This was entirely written by me. I will read you some of it, but let me give you a little backstory.

So my high school D and D campaign was entirely based on hbor age, although I probably gave it a lot more magic than Robert E Howard had in his just that — the way D andd works. But part of the reason I did it was I had all the ace paperbacks. So I had all the Conan short stories and the one Conan novel, which was the hour of the dragon, that had ever been written and it was one of the few fantasy series with a map that my friends hadn't read so like.

There's no way I could do a Lord of the Rings one. There was no way I could do.

Um God, there was so many white gold, wielder bunch of other Fantasy games that were out of really popular in the uh, late 70s, early 80s. So I had my high school D and D campaign based on Conan. So I had all these notes. I had extensive notes on all the countries, on languages, on cultures, on how magic worked. I mean these are just things that I started writing when I was 14 years old for my D and campaign, so when we were struggling to figure out what troa was going to do after Bloodlines shipped. I just wrote up this proposal. It was called Conan the Barbarian, an action RPG by Troy games, and I will. It starts with a gameplay example, so I will read that to you.

Chapter 12 in the Hall of the Dead, the player, as Conan, has traveled through the stigan desert at night to a large pyramid of set which houses a temple to that evil snake, God. The players come in search of the heart of aramin, a magical Jewel of great power and the only means of raising a fallen comrade from the dead. Expecting to find an empty Temple at this late hour, the player is surprised to find guards at the great bronze door of the temple. To make matters worse, Priests of set are walking into the temple from the nearby City. Some dark ritual must be taking place inside. The player has choices. He could kill the guards and any nearby priest who noticed his attack, or he could look for other ENT entrances to the pyramid Temple, or he could try to slip past the guards, either unnoticed or in Disguise. The player decides to try the last option. Moving into the surrounding Dunes, he spots a lone priest hurrying to get to the pyramid Temple, waiting until the priest is out of sight of the temple guards due to a large intervening Dune. The player chooses his strangulation attack, crushing the neck of the victim without a sound Dawning the dead priest black robes. The player continues walking towards the pyramid and passes by the guards unnoticed and unharmed.

The player finds himself in a large internal Gallery with BL Black Walls that are lined with teers of carved and painted sarop sarcophagy. In the dimlet hall, the player sees two groups already fighting over the possession of the mighty gem, the heart of the heart of araman. One group, the priest of set, are fighting with curved knives and black magic, while the yellow robed assassins of Kit are fighting with snake like stabs that can paralyze their opponents upon a hit. Meanwhile, the heart of aren rests on top of a sarcophagus, briefly ignored, while the battle rages again, the player has choices. He could wait to see how the battle goes, fighting only the side that's Victorious, hopefully before, either before that side reaches the gem, or he could jump into battle immediately and attack both sides, killing everyone in the hall, or he could sneak over to the gem and take the treasure he has sought for weeks.

Again. The player decides to try that last option. He successfully slips past the battle unnoticed and reaches for the heart of aaman. But as he does so, the sarcophagus lid moves aside and the mummy within sits upright, partially animated by the mere presence of the powerful gem. The Mummy grabs a player's arm as he reaches for the heart and the battle begins: dot.

So that was the opening of The Proposal of what I wrote. To try to get a publisher — any publisher we had no idea — interested in this game. Um, I had some sections that were just brief overviews I wrote Game overview.

Conan the Barbarian is an action RPG set in Robert Howard's glorious hiban age, the age of Conan, an age of Black magicians, corrupt Kings and proud adventurers. Blackhaired and sullin. Conan was a thief, a Corsair, a man at Arms who traveled the length and breadth of The Shining kingdoms of the hiban age, eventually to rule one of his own, the fates of Empires turned on the strength and skill of his sharp edged sword. Under engines and Graphics, I wrote. We plan to use the technologically advanced Source engine, the engine behind valve halflife 2. Conan the Barbarian will be played in an over-the-shoulder third person mode, affording the player an outstanding view of Conan and His stunning combat animations. Conan and his foes will attack with synchronous animations for a cinematic feel, and All Creatures will use normal map technology for even great greater detail.

Oh, normal map, normal Maps — those were a big thing in the early were. Those were a big thing in the early 2000s?

Realistic facial animations will bring these hiban characters to life under system mechanics, I wrote. Unlike most role playing games where the player begins as a weak character, Conan the Barbarian starts the player with a strong main character already. The player then chooses how to make. Him even more powerful as the game progresses. He can buy additional combat moves, such as strangulation or Cyclone strike stealth moves. He can buy damage resistances to injury types such as crushing or fire, or even buy magical immunities in order to bring down powerful Wizards. Multiple combat moves later on can be stacked for more devastation. Realisic, realistic physic simulations will allow Conan to toss his enemies around from the sheer force of his blows.

The hi? Borian age is not your standard High fantasy world, but a world struggling towards a modern age after centuries of magical oppression. Unique creatures abound in this setting, from degenerate manapes to magically animated constructs, to creatures from Beyond the outer dark. Using his sword, his bow or just his fists, Conan must defeat all of these foes and more before he can lay a crown upon his trouble brow.

Yes, I read a lot of conent stories. The interesting thing about this is I have no idea who we sent this to. All of my notes are what I just read to you. There's no uh detail of the systems, even though in my head I'm already remembering what I was thinking of doing. There's no mention of who we sent this to. There's no art attached to it I think, literally, this is something that I wrote by myself and threw in the. The pile of here's a bunch of things we're going to try to get. And then I've already talked about what we actually ended up pursuing. Was bers Gate 3, uh. Might and Magic, which I think was Might and Magic 10, um, there were a bunch of proposal. Was The Lord of the Rings? Uh, we, Revisited that, well, what we were trying to do after finishing Arcanum.

There was the proposal for Temple, of Elemental Evil 2, which was what I told you: the gdq expansions, Giant, Dr, Queen of the demon with pits, um, there's even the thing I will not mention, which is the game I designed, the uh fallout game I designed, which I am not going to talk about, because if I ever see Bethesda do a game, a Fallout game, with these features or this setting, I will know. It's complete coincidence, and I don't believe I showed this to anybody, but I've got a copy of it is dated May 25th 2004, so, anyway, I thought you'd like to see, uh, another one of the proposals we did after doing the balers gate 31: um, just to hear what, we were thinking in of doing after Bloodlines. I don't think this ever went anywhere, though, but I hope you liked hearing it.
