+++
title = "Game Development Roles"
date = "2024-08-19"
id = "DEnlUqYkMTk"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers", "Game Development"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about game development roles."
references = ["F7uaMQnMsvI", "sYZCYDRQtSs", "85trmtqR-s8", "dekd1zMcXB4", "nQ2IMGC569U", "Qc8zuhaqWPM", "lwlRDhPZxLc", "qmfZFoc53ss", "4XzaRlW2sio", "xM6Cr04wWSc"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about game development roles.

Now I could have sworn I had talked about this before, but the closest I got was programming — programming roles. But I have talked a lot about what makes a good game director, traits I look for in producers and challenges that face, or challenges that programmers, artists or designers have to face. So there's a lot of related videos and I've linked them all in the description, but I'm going to do this one now. I'm answering Seth, the guy GD, who asks: I was wondering if you have a video explaining the job in game development process and what they do: artists, programmers, producers, leads, designers and all that. I was having questions about that. I know that every studio is different. Could you explain it to me? I know it might be silly, their names are self-explanatory but would mean a lot.

In other words, who does motion capture? Who does Quest items?

I get it and I it is different in every. Studio and I'll try to mention where those differences come in um. So I'm going to describe like what I encountered and keep in mind I've never worked at really, really huge companies, but I have worked on small and medium-sized teams. So I will talk about that and let's start with.

The game director has also in director. The game director has also in the past been called project leader. This is basically whoever is The Keeper of the vision, whoever is like. This is my idea for the game we're making doesn't mean a lot of people don't contribute, but who's like pushing this thing through, who's steering the boat, um, who writes the design pillars, who decides what the goals are of all the different features that are in the game and sometimes even writes the design docs for those features. That's the game director, that's the project leader, also towards the end. Of development. This is the person who will play the game a lot. No one will play the game — with the exception of, possibly, QA — more than the game director because, it's their Vision, they've got to see all the different parts of the game. They've got to see as much as there is to see. They may not ever be able to see all of it, but they're going to try to see as much as they can to make sure that everything's aligned to that.

Let me quickly jump to produce. Um, producers come in roughly three TI. There's executive producer — which are usually only exist in bigger companies, otherwise they're called a lead producer. In a bigger company, you have an executive producer with lots of lead producers under them. In smaller companies, you may just have a lead producer and in which case what that role does is they keep the master schedule for the game, all the estimates of how long things are going to take in all the different areas, so they can come up with here's when I think the game will ship, which may not align with when it's supposed to ship.

Um, they're the person who interfaces with the publisher. When the publisher calls, they tend to call the, executive or lead producer. They also interface with the different, the other parts of the studio, like um, the owners, the president, the VPS, HR. Now those people can reach out directly to, people on the team too, but when they have general questions about the project, like is it on schedule or when is the next time we're talking to the publisher, when does localization start, they go to the, ep, the um, the EP or lead also manages other producers and they may even manage. Some external development in really big titles. You may hand art out to external companies, especially um cinematics, local things like that. They — anything that's not done in-house — will eventually get coordinated through the EP or the leap um and then under them there are sometimes it's called assistant producer, sometimes it's called associate producer. Some places have both of those and they tear them. I can never remember if it's assistant producer.

It's higher than associate or Associates, higher than assistant um, at interplay they were both called asrs, affectionately. Um, what these people do is they, answer to the lead, their lead or the executive producer and they manage. Strike teams are when you put together a, small group around five or six of the people on the game team to work on a particular part, like they may. There may be a combat Strike Team, there may be a stealth Strike. Team, there may be a cinematic Strike Team, there maybe a lighting Strike Team, and it's usually a programmer, one or more programmers, artists and designers, man Ed by an assistant producer. They keep the schedules for those strike teams and everybody who's on them and they pass those numbers up to the lead or the EP to put into the master schedule. They also handle some external developers as well. This gives it leads us to programmer, and actually really fast, let me talk about programmer, artists and designers.

What they all share in common? They all have a very similar hierarchy. Usually you have a director for that area, a programming director, a design director, ctor or a — uh - art director. These are the people who manage everyone under the leads and the leads are leads in all the different areas. Now, on smaller projects, you may only have a lead. Programmer or a lead designer or lead artist and the sub areas are managed by seniors. But on really big projects — and this is what we did say on the The Outer Worlds, you have a director and the director talks to leads in all the different areas and then adjacent to the lead is a principal principles are people who don't manage anyone, but do most of their work in one of those areas, like a highly specialized, really good at what they do person, and then under leads are seniors. Seniors are people who can manage their own work, make their own estimates, um, finish, help finish up designs and things and work with the designers to come up with like numbers and the exact things that have to be done to finish that, and then below that is sometimes they're called staff, sometimes they don't have any title and there's other people. Who' been there a few years and they know their area pretty good and they do their work and they answer to a senior and then they're are Juniors and that's when they're newly hired. They haven't done this much before they start as Junior.

Now that's the hierarchy in programming, Art and Design. Now in programmers, the areas could be Graphics or gameplay or AI or UI or networking — basically any area that requires some programming expertise. A lot of generalists go into gameplay because gameplay is like writing up combat rule, mechanics, rules and writing up stealth rules and working on the dialogue system and stuff and things that need underlying mechanics that connect to the other systems, like the user interfaces or um. AI. Art has the same hierarchy as programming, but their areas are quite different. That would be, there are people who make 3D models, people who texture those. Models, people who rig those models, which means they put they put the bones in them to show how the model could move and then people actually make them move — called animators. There are concept artists who draw images and go — this is what we think the game is going to look like, and this can be anything from a level to scenery, to Furniture, to pieces of artwork like this is like we had concept artists do all the ads for The Outer Worlds. Um, there are cinematics artists, there are motion capture artists, who specialize in getting map suits on people and dogs and all kinds of things and capturing the motion to be used for rigging an animation.

Now, if you're a 2d artist — I've said in the past, there's a lot of room for you in games. You don't have to be 3D artist. Textures are 2D. Uh icons for use. In user interfaces are 2D. Fonts in user interfaces are 2D. Usually the uis themselves are 2D, so there's a lot of room for 2D artists. Still, like I've said before, there are probably more 2D artists working in the industry today than there were in the 90s, when it was all 2D artists.

Um, and then there are this. The same hierarchy exists in design for designers. In there, the areas are things like system mechanics, which are character build, combat mechanics, stealth mechanics, dialogue mechanics, economy. There are narrative designers who create NPCs, write the dialogues for them, come up with the quests for them, although I'll put a little asteris next to quests. Uh, there are ux designers. Ux is the experience where UI is the actual thing that pops up. The ux designers work with artists and programmers to get the user interfaces working and then level designers they make.

Maps with — uh, the layout, towns, points of interest, pois, and they also do quests. They work really closely with the narrative designers to get quests implemented. So, in fact, you, I still have a memory of Leaning out my door and there was a narrative designer and a level designer and they were, they were talking really quickly in the hallway and I was just looking at him like what you guys talking about, because it was just you could tell it was something interesting going on. And you see that a lot narrative designers and level designers get together to work out how quests are going to go, because the NPCs have to give it to you, but the level designers actually have to place the encounters and put the items in, and so they tend to work very closely. Now there's two more areas where there are roles. I am less familiar with these areas because I tend to work with the, directors in those areas, and then they distribute the work below them, but it's the audio department.

Audio handles everything in the game that you hear — music, sound effects — and those sound effects could be on items could be on, particle effects could be on. You know, when you open a container or open a door or the, sound of tree makes, you know just a scenery item makes because it's being hit by wind, background noise that you hear. Basically, if you hear it, you know it's a sound effect. And then user interfaces have their own set of sound effects and then cinematics usually get music and sound put in them separately, because everything's so well sequenced that you can, you don't have to do things independently, you can have everything work together. So that's audio, and then QA has a director for a project, sometimes just a lead um, if it's a smaller project.

They handle all the testing in the game: finding the bugs, writing up the bugs, maintaining bug reports. They make test plans so that they and they usually work with the game director on this. The test plans are for different player builds, different play Styles which can be different than player builds, like play Styles like I like talking to everybody, I like doing all the side quests, I like killing everyone. Then there's also uh test plans for console versus PC and different consoles get different test plans because they have different requirements, like what they require in the menu and save games and just there's a lot of different requirements for all the different consoles and production handles that. But they do it through QA.

Um, they may play there, make uh test plans for playing the game. At different difficulties. They often maintain large save libraries so that when someone comes along and goes, hey, um, I'm supposed to test u, a character who's a really talky character going through this area, they're like here, here's a save game with a character with lots of speech skills about to enter that area. Boom, um, they also handle minimum and recommended specs, meaning they will play the game on a minimum spec machine and also a recommended spec machine and report back not just bugs encounter but like how the frame rate's doing and if things stuttered and if it sounded good and looked good and was still playable and reasonably attractive. So that's all part of QA. I think that's everything in a in the game development roles.

Notice: I didn't touch on the administrative part of the company with the presidents and the VPS and HR and marketing. Notice: I didn't.

Talk about Publishers, localization. All that stuff would usually outside the game development group. I mean, it all goes on the credits of the game but it's usually outside of what people consider game development roles. So, Seth the guy GD, I hope this answers your question.
