+++
title = "Achievements"
date = "2024-03-07"
id = "DMQC4LnEA8I"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about achievements."
references = ["zjtctCu6VoI", "u0pJN3jpUjQ", "fzUzRqmgJKE", "2hDxie2Fnvo", "qm2qwgVwf1A"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about achievements.

I've gotten a lot of questions over the last several months about achievements, mainly asking me whether I like them or whether I don't like them, what I think of them, and I've thought about this a lot because I was trying to figure out how to say it, how to crystallize my thoughts, because I know, like with a lot of my other videos, people are going to pick and choose what they hear in it and you know, waiting for, you know, an article. Tim Kane hates achievements, but let me tell you this: is my high level: I have a love hate relationship with achievements and to understand why you kind of have to look back probably 30 years for me to understand, like, how I view achievements. So in the '90s and even the early 2000s, I was doing RPGs that had a lot of tracker variables. That's how I did endgame slides. That's how I did story reactivity. That's how I had NPCs just react to the player — um, even if it's just a bark over their head going — you don't have clothes on — kept track of lots of variables. Sometimes they'd look at the player and look at values on them, but sometimes variables would be tracked globally. They did this thing, the player said this thing, the player found this thing.

It's just done globally so anyone can look at it on any map. I did that in Fallout and Arcanum and those same tracker variables were what were used to make the end slides, which I really liked because I liked the game's over. But let's shoot forward 10, 20, 30 years and see the results of your actions.

I think people liked them too. They became really popular. I saw them in a lot of other games — Temple, we did that as well. We had end slides, but we also started adding uh trackers.

Of other things, and that's why there was a page called the ego page in your journal and that was like: this was the highest level monster you ever killed, this was the most damage you ever did in one attack. Those were things that were fun to see and it was interesting to see like youd play through one character and he could get a really high damage and then another character could kill a really high level creature, and it all and because it depended on different things. You know a glass Cannon could do a lot of damage but couldn't take a lot of damage.

So there were a lot of things like that and I thought that eagle page was fun. It was fun to look at, especially as the game was going. Then achievements came along. Achievements were games doing tracking, but they were doing it for achievements, which in my mind, were kind of like quests that were given to you from the very beginning. That had no context.

They're given to everybody. Sometimes you don't even know they're there. Sometimes you do and it would pop up and say, hey, you just achieve this. In general I like that if what it was watching you do was aspirational, if it required your character to have some skill and you as the player to put forth some effort, things like. Even if it was like killing 100 ogres, that's great. If you didn't kill ogres just as you went along normally in the main storyline maybe. Maybe there were 50 ogres that you might kill in the main story line, but the other half were things that were completely optional and maybe some of them were even hard to find. Maybe there was a m M ogre clan that was in a place that was really hard to get to. Maybe you had to go through a secret Valley, or maybe you had to sneak up there through a cave or find the One path up the mountain and you could finally get to those ogres, and those ogres were the ones that finally got you to 100. That would be fun, or maybe you find a treasure, a weird treasure in the game, and it's on some dead adventurer who has a note saying there's 20 of these and rumor is, something amazing will happen when you get all 20. So you're go and you try to find all 20 of those and what you get is an achievement. Even something as mundane as pickpocketing can have a really cool achievement.

That hey, you've. You've pickpocketed something worth more than like 10,000 gold and, of course, something like that probably going to be on somebody wealthy, somebody who is in a situation where it be hard to pickpocket. I mean something that some thought went in before a designer just dropped a 10,000 gold piece item in someone's inventory and so some thought and Care would have to be done by the player to actually get that achievement to do a pickpocket that difficult. And what I love about these achievements is it's the way for the, designer, to go. Hey, I saw what you did there. Here's an achievement kind of a thumbs up from the designer to the player, kind of bypassing context in the game.

There was no Quest that some NPC was waiting for you to do. There was no lore that you were uncovering.

It's basically as pure a communication Channel between the designer and the player as you can get. Hey, I saw what you did there. Good job, but what I saw happen was how people started using these.

In other games were in very non aspirational ways. I could give a ton of examples and I don't want to pick on games, but I'll give like two that I saw as achievements started becoming popular. There was one game where you were given an achievement if you survived a 100 foot fall. In other words, you fell 100t or more and didn't die, which meant a you had to find a place to fall from. That was high enough, but not too high, and you had to be at least a certain level, so you had certain amount of health and some classes could do it earlier because they got more hit points, and some classes could do it later. But to me it was like: why are you encouraging players to die? Why are you making falling an aspirational thing I?

I thought that completely lost sight of what the achievement system. Was trying to do, similarly, I've seen some games do achievements for something you achieve in multiplayer, like you and your team did this, or you did this while another player did this, and what I don't like about those is it depends on other people. So you may not be able to get one of those Achievements, not because you're not good enough or smart enough or understand what you're supposed to do. It's because you never got in a situation where you had team that cooperated with you to do it, so it doesn't feel as much as an achievement as, hey, you were really lucky that you got some people who agreed to do this thing with you. I don't like that. Achievements moved from being something aspirational and some way of the designer going hey, good, job, to literally just a checklist of things you should do, and that's what people started treating them as and, worse, companies started requiring them. Um, you know, achievements went on to steam and had to be implemented through their API consoles. The Xbox and the PlayStation had achievements and part of the wreck system that you had to go through to get you know.

Um, your final check off on is this game meet our requirements? Sometimes there were achievements. You had to have a certain number of achievements or certain kinds of achievements, and suddenly they went from being this cool, optional, aspirational thing to being just another required thing, that that you were supposed to do another. Here's a checklist of things you should be doing in this game if you want to have considered the game 100% completable And, like all things in this world that go from being optional to required, they lost sight of their original goal and they lose a little bit of that.

Luster. I think they went from being this creative extra way of thinking about playing the game to this just soulless Point based checklist, and I don't think that's what they started out to be, at least not for me, but that's what they've ended up being. Then, and just to be clear, they're not like that in all games. Some games still have really cool aspirational achievements, but some games don't. Um, and trying to explain that to designers like the reason I like this achievement but not like this achievement, is this one's not aspirational? They're arguing: oh no, it is aspirational.

Do you know how hard it is to do this? And you've convinced people, or I get it, I get it. Maybe different people have different definitions of aspirational, but achievements really bring that out. And I also don't like how some people are made to feel like they didn't really complete a game because they didn't do some of the achievements. Even worse, when those achievements. I really hate achievements that require you to have played a particular class or you cannot do it because you may not want to.

I mean, think about it. That's forcing you to play class in a game that you don't want to play just because you want to get an achievement. I also don't like achievements that you have a very limited window to get it, like you can only get it on this map and you can only get it when that map is in a certain State, like once you've done the map, maybe you're cut off from getting that achievement windows. So those kind of achievements that like, Oh, by the time you realize you may want to get it's too late the window for you to getting that achievement is gone. I do not like that. It me as um requiring meta knowledge that is unfair to expect a player to have and certainly isn't something that you want to tell a player they have to have. Remember, I view achievements as aspirational. It's you, the designer, saying hey player, I like what you're doing, but it's more: become hey, player, I'm going to tell you what to do and you have to do it.

So that's where achievements stopped being something I liked and started being something that I disliked and in some cases, even hated. So where we are now with achievements is there are some games that have achievements I like, some games that have achievements I don't like, and then a lot of them are kind of somewhere in the middle where I start to get some achievements and I go H. I'm not really into this and I just stopped paying attention to them. But I think some games do it well and I like it when they do it well, but for the most part the underlying system of achievements, which is tracking what the player does, I love and I love doing that for story reactivity and end slides, not achievements. So that's kind of my thought on achievements and I know a bunch of people have asked questions. I decided not to say like the latest one or the earliest one just because so many people asked that. I hope this answered all the different questions I got about achievements.
