+++
title = "Fallout vs. Arcanum Story States"
date = "2026-04-06"
id = "dxI7vErdauA"
status = "production"
tags = ["Fallout", "Arcanum", "Narrative Design", "Quest Design", "Player Choice"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Fallout versus Arcanum's story states."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Fallout versus Arcanum's story states.

This is something I've mentioned many, many times on here. I always talk about Fallout having three and Arcanum having 27. Most recently, uh, I did it in a video and Richard to the Argo asked: "Hey Tim, can you do a video breaking down what a 27 act story looks like? You've mentioned it a few times now and I can't quite wrap my head around that number. As opposed to the more traditional three or five act structure, I'm assuming the extra acts are variations accounting for player choice, and a given playthrough will only touch three or five acts of those 27. Curious what you have in mind. Thanks, here you go.

Couple things. Those acts of Arcanum are linear acts. You are expected to do all of them. Also, there were only 25, not uh 27. I've been saying 27 for a long time, but I checked my notes and I was like "Oh, it says there's 25.", so then I opened up an Arcanum DAT file and looked at the data inside and there were 25. So this is just another reason I like keeping notes, because my memories aren't good, yours aren't good, all my co-workers aren't good. I always go back to notes and data because we always are misremembering things. Another thing is I'm talking about main story acts here, not side quests.

You can do them in any order. You can. That allows a lot of variation. These are the quests. These are the acts that you will go through. These are the story states that players will experience if they do a playthrough of your game. Also, like all my other story quests, the player chooses how to complete an act, which usually means an act is defined by completing the quest or sometimes a very small set of quests associated with that act. You complete them. The act is marked as completed. It goes without saying this is spoilers for both Fallout Arcanum—I—I don't know how else I can talk about their entire storyline without there being spoilers. So don't watch this if you want to play either of those games and not know what the story is.

So Fallout's three acts—these are talked about by me by a million different YouTube videos—there are three acts and they are this: Get the water chip, destroy the mutant army and the FEV tanks that are being used to make that army, and kill the master. That's it. Those are the three acts.

Here's some interesting facts about them, though. They're nonlinear, meaning you can do those acts in almost any order. And I say almost because of interesting fact number two: Because of a script error, we forgot to check that you actually get the water chip. So you can skip that. So you can literally finish Fallout in two acts if you want. Kill the master, get rid of the army. If you do all three, the water chip can't be last because once you finish the first two it'll trigger the script to end the game. So you can kill the master, then get the water chip, then destroy the army. You could get the water chip, destroy the army, kill the master. You can do anything you want as long as the water chip isn't the last one. Let's contrast this to Arcanum's 25x, and yes, I went through notes.

For those of you who want to crack open Arcanum's data file, it is located within storystatemes. Those are the messages associated with each one of the story states. And I think it got displayed somewhere, I think. You could either, there was some NPCs you could ask. It was tied to an Arcanum script command saying explain the story state. Unlike Fallout, the Arcanum STO 25 story states are linear in that you — we — expected the player to do them in order. I'm not sure if the players can jump over any of them — I'm sure speedrunners may have found some clever ways to do that — In fact, I'm positive they have — But our intention was they were linear and you did them in a particular order. But each one of them could be completed multiple different ways because they're main story quests. You can fight your way through them, talk your way through them, or stealth your way through them. Also sprinkled in the Arcanum world were tons of side quests — side quests that you were expected to be able to do, were you were expected to be able to do at any time and do in any order, whenever you wanted. So even though this sounds a little rigid, saying "Hey, we have 25 story acts and you will do them in order," there's a lot of things you could be doing outside of that, in any order you want.

So, with all that aside, let's go through the 25 Arcanum story acts which, because I'm a programmer, start at zero.

So let's do it. First one, given you've been given the strange ring by Preston Radcliffe. Then speak to someone at P. Shiler and Sons, where you can find an inscription on the ring. Then find Gilbert Bates, then search for the location of the Black Mountain Clan. Then search the Black Mountain Clan mines. When you can't find the clan, the next one is search for the location of the Isle of Despair, which is where you think the clan is. The next story state. We're up to story state six, starting at zero.

Journey to, to the loca, to the Isle of Despair, to find the Black Mountain Clan. Then, when you can't find them, travel to the Wheel Clan, which is another dwarven clan, to find out what happened to the Black Mountain clan. From that you must find the location of Canara, the city of the elves. Then we're up to story state 9. Travel to Canara and find out what was the elves' role in this whole disappearance of the Black Mountain clan. Thing, next, find out about Renford A. Turwilliger. The next date, discover that Renford A. Turwilliger is dead, but he did write a book called Horror Among the Dark Elves, which now you have to go find. The next story state is when you learn that there is one remaining copy of Horror Among the Dark Elves, and it's in Caladon with somebody named Victor Misque. The next story state 13, you find the book. The next story state is: you read the book, because remember people could pick up something and not do anything. So those have to be separate story states. You read the book, discover the location of Senang, which is the home of the dark elves in Fif. Uh, the 15th one is: you go.

You go to Senang and you learn about Arinax, which was a legendary elf. That leads you to learn about Nazdan, an even more legendary elf, who supposedly died 2,000 years ago. The next story state: you learn that his remains are in Kaladon. You go to Kaladon looking for his remains. You discover they're not there, so instead you have to go to the island of Thanoos. There you learn that there's something called the Vendigroth device that you will need to find, and it's somewhere in the deserts called the Vendigroth Wastes. You go to the desert, you find the city of Vendigroth, you find the Vendigroth device, and you're told you have to go to the ring of Broadgar. We're up to story state 20.

Is you have to get banished to the void. 21. Search the void. 22. Learn about Kiran the Terrible. By the way, one of the best cut scenes in the game is when you talk to Kiran. 23. Find Krygard's Falchion. I don't know how to pronounce that word. You'd think I would because I put a falchion in the game. I don't know how to pronounce it: Fauchon, Fauchion, The polar. And then 24, which is the last and 25th story.

Remember we start at zero because programmer brain. Finish the game. Notice it just says finish the game. Maybe you killed Kiran, maybe you agreed with him, maybe you joined him. As long as the game ends you go to story state 24. I know there was some, um, discussion we had about whether Arcanum could keep being played after story state 24, but irregardless, when you hit that story state, that's the last time any quest will advance the story state.

Anyway, I hope that answers your question. Rich to the audio.
