+++
title = "Compromising For The Medium"
date = "2025-04-14"
id = "E5SSjRQu2fA"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Player Choice"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about compromising for the medium and basically"
references = ["yqk-A-MmrbE", "puYzP1Uax0k", "OoJ6CDDfYiU", "WCO4n6nMXOo", "2hDxie2Fnvo", "qm2qwgVwf1A", "-MsQItsj-qc"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about compromising for the medium and basically

this is a talk about how you can't have everything you want in your video game, because it's a video game. The nature of video gaming prevent or should very much discourage you from trying to do certain things, and I want to talk about that because it falls under the bigger categories. You can't have everything you want, now I'm not talking about the compromises that you may have to introduce because you're working in a team and other people have different ideas and different things they want to try. I have a whole working in teams video I'll link below. I'm not talking about compromise because you or the team members don't have the skills needed to implement the design ideas that you've created. I have a whole video about matching projects to teams.

I'll link that below, and I'm talking about compromising here. So I'm not talking about the advantages the video game medium has over movies and TV shows. And books. I have multiple videos on player agency and multiple videos on nonlinearity and I'll link those all below. I think those are good to watch for context for this video. But what I really want to talk about is things that you will have to do differently because you've now decided to tell your story or place your setting in a in a video game. It's, compromise you're making, because when you're making a game some things are easy, other things are hard, and that's always dependent on the medium. So all that stuff I talked about — player agency and nonlinearity — that's a lot easier to do and in some cases really only possible doing a video game. People will talk about the rare TV show that lets you pick, you know what ending you get, or playing an — uh, Choose Your Own Adventure book. Those are rare and they're not nearly what we're talking about, that you get with video games.

Let me like. Let me give you an example of what I'm talking about. I'll talk about the compromise that's needed.

Let's talk about TV. Shows are episodic. It doesn't matter whether they're broadcast or whether they're scamed. They're episodic and the nature of contracts with actors are such that actors are paid especially — I think this is true for every actor — and it's especially true in terms of more money and residuals — if they speak lines based on how many episodes they appear in. So you may have an actor that appears in one episode or in a limited number of episodes in a season, or even just one season, and then they're gone. Because of the way budgets work, you pay them a lot less if they're only in one episode or a few episodes or one season. So your story: may need to be Rewritten so that they only appear in one episode. You may need to reorganize it, something they were going to do in the first three episodes. You can press that all into the first episode, or maybe you just reorganize things. Maybe a line that they were going to say in the in the second episode is now said by a completely different character, so you don't need them in that episode anymore and you may go.

Why do you do this? And it's like I've always say: the answer is money. Money is not infinite for any project.

For a lot of TV shows, you're either given a season budget or a budget per um episode, and the money that you save because you don't use an actor across multiple episodes is money you can use for special effects or location shooting or music licensing, which may be more important than having this one actor come back for a particular scene four episodes later. So it's an example of a compromise you make to your original story and scripts so that you can have some other things that you want. Game design has a ton of compromises like that. Now, what's interesting about game design is a lot of those compromises are technical. For example, I've talked a lot about, you know, graphics and visual Fidelity and all That's a good example of where you may have to change your design just because technologically it can't be realized. Maybe the graphical complexity, the number of Poes in your models, maybe the draw distance, maybe the number of objects in the scene, whether they're other creatures, so you want a big like Army attacking, or whether it's just a lot of scenery objects, so you want a very dense foliage in this area, or maybe it's.

Really complicated. Collision detection: you want a, creature that's really complex and has lots of surfaces that you want to collide, when most of the other things you're relying on a simple sphere or cylinder collider, which are way cheaper to detect. So because of that, because of those kind of restrictions, you may have to redesign things and it can be anything from. You may have a creature that's a giant multi — tentacled blob and you have your lead program going. We can't do that, maybe two tentacles, so maybe it changes into a creature that attacks with its two front arms. Maybe you have a really big Zone. You want a huge Zone with tons of things hidden away in it and it really encourage exploration.

Can't do that. You're going to have to chop that up into instances and then each of those instances has named its own subzone and now you don't have a big Zone anymore. Or maybe you just wanted a jungle. You wanted really complex, Rich uh trees with lots of ferns and other foliage, fol foilage under it, and that's just way too many Poes that have to be rendered. And also you wanted wind, and so you want them Sway, and it's just, it's too much. You have to redesign. You have to come up with a different way of telling your story or in a different way, in a slightly different setting. You mechanics may have to change, you may have ideas for spells that are just way too intense to run. You redesign, and there's a whole host of technical reasons, so I'm not even going to try to listen them all here. But that's a major thing about video games is there's so many technological moving parts that you may just have to resign frequently. To account for that, but then there's non-technical things, like pacing, and unlike TV shows or movies or books, games can't force the main uh character, which is the player. They can't force movement, they can't force attention.

Now there are things you can do like: okay, here's a snippet, a small cut scene or an animated in-game animation, like when the player clicks on an item, they pick it up and look at it, or maybe they hear an audio clip play, or maybe even a cut scene starts and they have to spend the next 15, 30 seconds watching it. Usually let them cancel out because if it's the fifth time you're playing this game. However, I've watched multiple times throughout my entire career.

Other designers take a design Sledgehammer to their game to try to force players into a pacing that they want. They will fight here they will find. This thing, they can't leave until they do, and I just I don't like that style and it's perfect example. What I'm saying is you have a medium that's encourages one thing and you're forcing it to be another thing. You're fighting against the very medium you've selected to tell your story in, because what you can do is you can encourage good pacing. You Don't Force It, you encourage it.

There are rewards for exploration. Your combat has a certain difficulty or it lasts a certain length of time and occurs at certain moments during the game, and if the player stays in one spot too long, maybe Random Encounters can happen. That used to be an old D and D mechanic where if players uh stayed in one area of the dungeon without moving, you rolled every 30 minutes to see if something walked into that area. You can do things, like that to kind of encourage players: keep going. This is an active World. Keep going now.

What you have to do, though, what you have to just understand and go. Some players will not oblig. They will do what they want to do and they won't do what you want to do, and you kind of just have to accept that. Like I said, rather than beat them with a stick for not doing what you want to do, dangle a carrot in front of the things you do want them to do. Most of them will go for the carrots.

But here's something that's true for games. That is way more of an extent that you have to think about than movies or TV shows. Movies and TV shows have this. Books really don't, but movies and TV shows have it a little bit. Games have it a ton, which — and that is.

The need to be future proofed — you can watch movies from the 1930s, from the 50s, from the 80s, no problem. They've been digitized or put on VHS or DVD or whatever, and you can watch them, games not so much. A lot of times you have to say: Can a game even be possible to be played?

That's 5, 10, 20, 30 years old, but more than that. Even if you could play it, does it still look good? Does it play well?

Certain uh tropes have come up, or styles of UI paradigms that some players are just used to like. Wasdi used to not be a thing where W and D keys were your movement Keys. Certain things with how the mouse interacts with the world were not defined until well after the mouse had been introduced. This is where future proofing comes in. You try to ship a game with options that make sure that the player can still enjoy it years later, when maybe some of those things have changed. So you know.

That's why you try to put in keyboard and controller rebinding. It's WHY games ship with visual options: because video cards are constantly getting better. They were. It was crazy back in the you know ' 80s and 90s, but it's still happening now. So you want to ship with options so that, even though there's a lot of cards that can't play your game at the maximum visual settings, now more and more cards will be able to.

I've even seen games, and I remember this happened in the 9s with a flight sim. A game shipped where there was absolutely no video card on the market that could play that game at its highest Fidelity settings. But guess what, within a year, or two there was one, so that was an interesting way that game got future proofed, that if you're making a, movie or TV show, you don't have to worry about that — at least not nearly to the extent that Gamers, game developers do. Now I will note that some changes can't be future proofed just because there's such a major increase.

Like when games went from 2D to 3D, you can't just press a button and go: okay, this 2D game is 3D. Now, when mono stere, when mono sounds went, uh, into stereo or even 5.1, yeah, you can play the mono sound on both speakers, but that's not the same as playing a stereo sound. So it's possible to Future proof some things, and I would say a lot of things, but not everything. And one thing that helps future proof is making hardware and the OS Backward Compatible, which some do and some don't.

You've all bought consoles. That let you play the previous console generation games. You've all bought operating systems that once you upgrade the new operating system, all your old software doesn't work. Those are choices that those manufacturers made, so you can't always future prooof your game, but I still think it's amazing that I can grab Windows games from the 9s and still play them now in the in the 2020s. That's cool, and it's because some of the future proof proofing was done at the hardware and Os level.

So this is my message to you budding game developers out there: just understand that you will have all these wonderful design ideas for story and setting and mechanics, but you will be compromising. You will have to make some compromises for the medium. Even if you're a solo developer and you're think I'm a solo devel, I can do whatever I want. No, you can't, there are some. Compromises that you have to make because you've chosen to express yourself in a video game, and I hope this helps when you're designing your game in the future.
