+++
title = "Fallout's Starting Date"
date = "2024-12-10"
id = "EeqTR3R5YZc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Fallout"]
summary = "I talk about why Fallout is set 84 years after the war."
references = ["c7Qg_vWzxXw", "oWd4RBdeoaM", "hZEosFcqmcU", "efCn85Tvrf8", "ETVsAHbTh2c"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fallout's starting date and specifically what I mean by that is: why is the original Fallout set 84 years after the war?

Now I remember us talking about this. I remember there being a meeting where we discussed it. Because I get into as much as I can remember from that discussion, because I remember taking notes, but I've gone through everything I've even had, have digitized my handwritten notes that I mostly had at home and there isn't a writeup on that meeting now. It was probably — destroyed because interplay threatened me with a lawsuit after I left so I destroyed all of the stuff I had at home. I talked about how I took a CD that had Fallout code. It had g code, it had the initial graphics Library code that I built ganol from which I used for the gerp star system generator that I've talked about, and it probably had digitized meeting notes on it that thing was destroyed. It's gone if there's any record on it, was probably on my interplay computer, which by now is certainly destroyed. I heard it was found at some point. Maybe the notes are out there, so who knows?

All I can say is, if you're one of the original the developers with me on that team, an OG Fallout Dev, if you notice anything wrong in this, let me know, because I would love to know if I'm right about what I'm remembering from the US talking about when to set uh fallout starting date. Now, I remember the first thing we wanted. One of the first things we talked about was we didn't want anyone in the vault to really know what was outside. We wanted it to be blank slate.

Tobl rasa. The player and his character don't know what they're getting into. That meant most of the people from the war probably.

Had to be dead. Uh, we didn't want anyone who was likely to be sent out of the Vault to have remembered being outside the Vault. Putting it 84 years in the future meant if there were any people in the vault in their late 80s or older who could possibly remember what was outside the vault, these people were going to be sent out as the sole hope of Vault 13 to find that water chip. So what that meant was, if you did encounter anyone in the Wasteland outside of a of ghouls who become sort of immortal but eventually they go feral, or a few mutants that may have been converted to a mutant after fev was found and those people were old enough to remember the uh pre-war, those are the only people who are going to have any memory of what life was like. Because 84 years later, if you encountered like a 90s something year old human, I mean they lived through a war.

Most of those people are dead and the ones that aren't are probably medically know well off. So that's how we first started picking a Time range like: let's have it so far in the future that most people pre-war are dead. At the same time we wanted it, we didn't want it too far in the future. We still wanted certain items usable. Remember we talked about being able to find canned goods and even though canned goods often say they're only good for 10 or 20 years, they're really good unless they start to expand. So if you find a can of beans and it seems like the Seal's good and it's not swelling, it's probably good to eat. So we wanted canned goods to be good, which limited us to less than a century from what we could research back then. We also wanted the player to be able to find guns and ammo. We were conflicted over how long those lasted.

Apparently, a gun that had been wellmaintained and oiled and kept in a case that might be good for centuries, especially if it didn't get wet. But ammo apparently goes bad quickly, but there were conflicting — um, there's conflicting information we found back in the 90s. Some people said it would be good for decades, other people said nope, as soon as gunpowder gets a little moisture in it's not good.

So that was part of the reason we invented groups like The Gun Runners and other groups, especially in the hub, who could sell you ammo. These people were finding old bullet casings and refilling them with newly made gunpowder and keeping gunpowder a secret. We also didn't want it so far in the future, though that batteries and atomic power generators weren't working anymore. We wanted some places to still have power. We wanted doors to open, force fields to work, things like that. So again, we had a limit on how far in the future it could be. We wanted structures to be mostly ruins, which, of course, atomic bombs would take care of that, but we wanted them still standing. So atomic bombs would level a lot of buildings. Buildings far away from bomb sites would still be there and ruined, but would probably quickly fall apart because they were exposed to the elements. But we wanted structures for the player to find, which meant not too far in the future. We also talked at length about locations we wanted to go to, and that some of them implied vaults had opened since the war. The player, vault 13, was designed to be a long-term Vault, but not all of. Them were, and then, if you played Fallout 2, you find out that Vault city was created by a vault.

That did exactly what it was supposed to. It opened after a certain amount of time. They had a Geck, they put together a city. These were all experiments and that was one that was supposed to test. You know, could it?

Could a vault be short-term, stable and then reconstruct civilization? After War? We wanted other vaults to have opened, some like the. The vault in necropolis was designed never to close, but we're talking about other ones like shady Sands talks about. Their place was created by people who left a vault when it opened. This also meant we talked at length about wanting new places, like a village that didn't exist pre-war.

Shady Sands was such a village. It was constructed after the war, maybe people lived in some towns, that's. What like the Hub was. Those were people who either survived or had left vaults a generation or two before and occupied a lot of pre-war half ruined buildings. We wanted factions to have time to form. We wanted the player to interact with a bunch of factions.

If it was right after the war or so soon that people were still struggling to scrape by, there wouldn't be a whole lot of factions. But if you give it enough time, a lot of these factions can form, especially because some of these towns were generational, in the sense that most of the people you're meeting there grew up in that town. They don't remember coming from a vault, they don't remember the war, so that this is the entire life they've ever had. So you end up with people forming factions because this is this is life now. This is what things are like.

They have no memory of what it was. So these were most of the things I could remember that generally gave us a clamp. We couldn't go too early or there'd be no time for some of the things we wanted to happen, like new towns and um, people forgetting the old ways. If you, if, you, if you go too early, you don't get those things. But if we made it too late, then some things would have been used up or run out so you wouldn't have had food, pre-war food, or guns and ammo, um, so that's We had that constraint, so we talked about it for a long time and I remember we talked about 60, 70 years and I think we ended up in the 80s, just to basically push away most of anybody who could be alive — the very few people are alive — were not going to be out adventuring. So that's how we arrived at that and I think it was interesting enough to talk about: uh, I've seen it uh guessed at, I've seen people have uh. This is why I think Fallout is set 84 years after the, bombs. But that's exactly why we did it. Those are the reasons that went into.

Okay, we know our setting. How far along after the war do we want it to be post-apocalypse, but not so far post that everything's collapsed and everybody's dead or it's a whole new civilization, and not so soon after the apocalypse that people were just still scraping by. So that's how we arrived at the timeline for Fallout and, seriously, if any of the OG devs remember anything differently, let me know.
