+++
title = "A Chat With Leonard Boyarsky"
date = "2023-05-28"
id = "Egh2p8ajb3w"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Interviews and Chats", "Fallout"]
summary = "I have my first guest, a man who needs no introduction: no, it's Leonard burarski. I've known him for 30 years. We've been working together for much of that time — not all of it. He had his own Adventures and he looks exactly the same, and I look like a picture of Dorian Gray, so that is. That is verifiably untrue. People can go Google and make their own decision."
references = []
+++

I have my first guest, a man who needs no introduction: no, it's Leonard burarski. I've known him for 30 years. We've been working together for much of that time — not all of it. He had his own Adventures and he looks exactly the same, and I look like a picture of Dorian Gray, so that is. That is verifiably untrue. People can go Google and make their own decision.

All right, how's it going? 10, it's been so long since I've talked to you. It's been minutes, um, or days.

So people have had a lot of questions on my Channel that I honestly don't know the answer to, and, rather than just make stuff up like I always do, I thought I'll just ask Leonard these questions. There aren't questions, there are questions on quests. I never worked on um. That's always the strategy, right, when you don't know what to do, you ask me: yeah, that's, been my strategy for 30 years.

I don't know what's going on, Leonard, what? Are these colors? Everybody keeps telling so, but before we jumped in, I kind of want people to know, like, how did you get into this business? Um?

Um, I needed a job, really 100. That's what happened. I am. I went to school to be an artist. I really wanted to be an illustrator.

Well, actually, let me step back a second. I was really into comic books, but I was also really into paintings, like — uh, our painters, like Norman Rockwell or Caravaggio, um, so I always had this weird push-pull between being a comic book artist and being, um, you know, more of an illustrator. And I decided to go for illustration because I was. It was way easier to put together reference and paint based on that than it was for me to create stuff out of my head, um, which, when 3D came along, that helped me. Tremendously actually, um, so, anyways, I put, I went to Cal State, Fullerton, and then I went to Art Center. I went to school long enough to become a doctor actually, which I love to tell people, um, and basically literally what it did was it allowed me to waste enough time to, uh, graduate.

Right at the time people were looking for artists for video games. Um, that's not totally true. I learned a lot, actually really great stuff there, but it but literally the best thing that happened to me was because I was at Art Center when Walt Disney came and hired a bunch of my friends this semester before, when I, after I graduated, I was looking for work. I couldn't find any. I had like got a couple like small paperback book covers, album covers, things like that, but it there was no way I was going to be able to support my family on that.

Um, I just called those guys up and I said, hey, is there any, is there any work? For? You?

Guys were working and I got hired on a freelance basis to work on a children's game of all things. Um, I was the only artist on it, so I immediately became the lead artist on it, which shows you how the industry used to work, because it was just craziness. They had no design. They had no designer. I really didn't have a big experience with games at all. I played stuff like Zork and Wizardry. Um, I, when I go to the arcade to play video games, I'd either play pinballs or watch my friends play, because I was horrible at video games.

But I love the art, um. So I I went to work there, um, you know.

Within a month or two they're like: oh, our game, this, we have no design for this game. So I'm sitting in the room with what people are making this game and we're designing a game which I have no idea how to do that and, of course, not surprisingly, that got canceled. And then I was hired to cut things out of backgrounds for this game called unnatural selection. Um, I actually got to do a little bit of interface art and a lot of touch-up, pixel touch up — on these horribly blue screened characters, and that indirectly, led to me being hired at Interplay to cut things out of backgrounds. So you know, kids are listening and want to get into the industry. It absolutely has nothing to do with your talent.

It's like if you can fill the job they need at that time, or at least that was my experience. Well, dude, you didn't find that your dark sense of humor and anti-capitalistic tones factored into the design of that children's game? Uh, no, I hadn't got that far in my creative abilities yet.

Um, it was actually. I mean, it was. It was interesting. It taught me a lot. I was using, you know, it was 320, 200 giant pixels.

Um, I was actually. Even though I was working freelance, I was going up to Burbank, to work, so they could teach me the. You know, this is how different things were. Um, when I went to apply for the job, I had a portfolio of oil paintings and acrylic paintings.

I had no computer work. I'd never worked on a computer. I'd worked on Macs, doing homework and stuff like that, writing papers. I'd never done any art on a computer. I showed them my portfolio.

He's like: okay, this is. Great, you know when can you start? I'm like: oh, you know, full disclosure. I don't know how to do anything on a PC. I I had familiarity with Max. I took a programming class in like 10th grade or something, where we learned basic and that was the extent of my computer knowledge. He said: I could do, I could turn, I could teach you how to use a computer in three days. I don't have time to teach you how to become an artist. Um so, fortunately, at that point in time it would be knowing art and being an artist was way more important than the technological or the technical skills then. Um so, oh, so that made us a good match, because I didn't know anything about art but I knew a lot about PCS.

The reason I paused there, I just started thinking I — I reflect on this fairly frequently — the whole thing is just weird, you know. So, like I get, I have, I mean, I, I have paintings up on my, website that I made, um, you know, I, I was fairly good at doing photorealistic, uh, paintings. I probably, if I had found the right people, could have made an okay living doing that. I wasn't great, but I was. I was wasn't. I wasn't great, but I was. I was pretty good um, but I couldn't, and so I just, you know, I got this weird job cutting things out of backgrounds and because I needed the job, so bad I didn't, you know, I could have been like all pissed off.

Like I have two degrees, I don't need to do this, I'm a, I'm a trained artist, but I just did it and I was working with this really cool guy named Nick, um in his bedroom, literally, um he was. He pitched this project at Disney. He was recording this thing on a. He had his own video camera. He had like a blue tarp behind it was.

It was just a bad setup for trying to cut things out. But you know, I, I cut things out and replace Parts because you know they'd get eaten away when he cut them out. Um, you know, and then from there I I ended up over at Interplay, because the first place I worked, Quicksilver, never did anything except work with Interplay, except for this one time. So, like this, chain of weird events like, led to Fallout, right. So I work for a company that never works for anybody who had Interplay, but this one time that project gets canceled. I forget how I got back in touch with them. I think they had they were doing. Some stuff through Interplay.

I did some paintings for castles like the. They were doing an enhanced version of castles, um, so I did paintings for that and somehow, I think I called them and I said: you know, is there who do I talk to? Over the airplane they sent me over to talk to Mazda and I showed him my stuff and he's like he was not impressed by my painting abilities.

Uh, well, because you needed to do pixel art. He wanted to see me create stuff out of my head and do the stuff that I really wasn't good at. Um, that's what he was looking at. You needed — you know, at that point this was 32200 still — um, you needed to be able to make pixels look like art, which was a totally different skill set.

Um, so he, but at that time Stone keep was going and they needed somebody. To cut things out of backgrounds, so because I had this kind of weird job cutting things out of backgrounds, I got a job cutting things out of backgrounds and AirPlay. Um, and from there, you know, I worked on Stone keep. I always wanted to work on RPGs. I love the idea of RPGs. I never really played RPGs. Um, we started coming to the RPG Thursday night thing, yeah well, but you know, again, like I didn't ask what I was working on, they were doing other games besides RPGs. At that point I had no idea Interplay was an RPG company, was a company where I knew somebody who could get me an interview with the art director.

That was literally as far as it went. It's like I had. I wasn't like this was the job I want, this is like where is my job that I can support my family. So I go on.

Oh, and the interesting thing that we've talked about is that, um, I did get a chance to do a freelance job for them where I painted. I was painting these screens for this game — it's called brags to riches and, um, you know, painting these oil paintings, then trying to scan that and dither it down to 300, 320 by 200. Like some poor fool had to like try to figure out how to get those into the game and I think that poor food was you, Tim, 1993, 30 years ago. I'm like we're talking a long time ago. Yeah, what's interesting to me is you went from school to work. You went from 2D to 3D. You went from never playing RPGs — you're playing RPGs — to making an RPG. I mean in a very short period of time. You had a lot of.

Transition there, yes, and none of it was planned, which sounds like Fallout exactly, but I mean that's, the path that led me there. I mean, I I got my first uh d box when I was 1977 or 78, I think, so it was really really early in d I've been reading about it in like fanzines and stuff, but I didn't know much about what it was and I didn't know anybody who played. And if you try to play D D without knowing anybody who plays it, or try to just play from the book, you die instantaneously, um. So I read all the books that I had and just kind of fantasized about what playing an RPG would be like, and it was literally. It was way more about the stories and being somebody playing in a world, um being able to make decisions. It was, you know.

A holograph, a hologram. Um, Hollow deck can't speak. This morning it was kind of like a holiday, I guess. You know the ultimate expression of what an RPG was would be and, um, you know, it had a little, very little to do with uh fighting in dungeons, um, which, of course, is you could see where my Inspirations come from or where I lean. Um, so then when I started a dinner plan, I heard that you know that you guys were playing uh RPGs on Thursday nights. I started.

That's when I first met you, though the when I first knew of you was it had to be from Spencer kype or Rob nessler was talking about, like you, this guy, Tim Kaine. He was really sick, he had, like this horrible chicken pox and I like, see and I'm like. So I heard the legend of Tim Kaine and everybody. Seemed to like you and everybody had a great opinion of you. But the thing I most knew was that you had just gone through this horrific, um chickenpox thing and I saw you walking around with it and it looked like you're, you know, 16 years old, with like spots all over again.

It was terrible. People, do you know that chickenpox strain was so bad. There were adult people getting it who had had it before and several people died that summer from that strain of chicken.

Wow, yeah, at the same time, right, yeah, I was in a bad State and we were trying to finish, um, Rags to Riches, and, um, they brought the computer to my house saying can you please finish it? And I answered and I'm like I look like death. I remember, uh, Fred Royals, Tom Decker's assistant producer. Yeah, I remember Fred took a step. Back when I opened the front door and just went, oh, because I looked really bad and I was like what do you want? He goes, they want you to finish the code and I'm like I can't sit up.

It was an interesting time, but, uh, it was. It was an interesting time, but uh, yeah, but yeah, but we started playing groups. Gurps was the first we play, first RPG experience I ever had was girls. I remember you not only played one Gert session but then you came the next two nights to watch me play other people through the same session. I, yeah, I hadn't remembered that.

You told me about that when we started The Outer Worlds, that how we had that conversation where I watched you play these people watch you run, uh, three different groups through the same dungeon and it was a completely different experience for each of. Them, and I was like, wow, you know, I, I was really impressed by how much, how many different scenarios you had planned for that thing and you're like I didn't have any of that. That was all on them making choices. And then we first talked about, yeah, yeah, like, can we do that in a computer game? That seems like it'd be fun, and I was like, yes, but it will be really hard. You underestimated just how hard it was going to be. But that was the impetus of it all. It's like if you watched, you went through it and then two other groups go through it, yeah, and it seemed like a different dungeon. Yep, so it's interesting, because, I mean, I really want to dive into some of the questions people have asked. Um, I know, when we talk about Fallout, two journalists, they, often seem a little dismayed. At how much of it wasn't pre-planned from the beginning.

Yeah, well, it's. You know, I mean continuing the threat of just weird things that happened. So I was working on Stone keep and I was cutting things out of backgrounds and I was working with Rob nestler mostly, and you know I worked my way through that as quick as possible. And then Trump comes to my office and I was like actually getting to do little pieces of art. I mean, we're talking little tiny icons, right for the — remember that inventory scroll that was on the right — like I did a couple of those and some like, uh, different little mini, like tiny pieces of Art.

And Rob comes to me one day and he goes: um, yeah, uh, we messed up when we told you how to cut these out, because there was something about it was they had me. Cut them out where, like you could — I don't even remember what it was. It was like I was cutting some of them out where it was like they were cut off. But it's like they know they all need to be full screen and we're just gonna like crop them ourselves. But they had had me crop them and he's like you're gonna have to do them all over.

And I literally went home and started making a new portfolio. I painted like three or four paintings over the next month or two.

I'm like I'm out of here. I can't do this anymore. I can't, I just can't, and I was and I failed. I got no work out of that. If I had gotten work out of that, I would have quit because I couldn't do it anymore.

Um, and worse than that, there was people on my team. Who shall remain nameless, one person in particular who was also cutting things out of backgrounds, and this person was doing such a crappy job. They weren't fired, they were. They were said they're like: well, don't cut things out of background anymore, we will give you other art to do. And I'm like if I had known all I had to do was be a crappy artist or a crappy employee, I could have, like you know, gone over to making actual art anyways. So I was like really upset with that, but I then.

The other thing that happened is they got the SGI machines, the thirty thousand dollar machines, which is literally how much it cost. I actually checked with Rob when I was doing that presentation in Portugal. I'm like, Rob, how much were those SGI machines?

It's like 30 000 bucks a piece and interview playing locked in a room. Yeah, in Rob's office there were animator — they were using a power animator, which is a precursor to Maya, and Interplay — again more, uh, more luck or happenstance, Interplay had had done all this research like what's the best software we can use to make 3D graphics, and color animator, was it? You know, that's what people in Hollywood were using at the time and they needed those SGI machines which were thirty thousand dollars a pop to run them. And they got that stuff and then they started trying to find 3D artists and they realized, wow, everybody who knows how to make this is working in the movie industry or use this software as working in the movie industry. We can't come anywhere near what they're making. And so they were sitting in the office, literally.

I don't remember. Know if you remember where we were sitting there?

I was like outside Rob's office. He'd come out and lock the door so nobody could get in there, and like mess with the machines. And one day I'm like I gotta, I have to figure out how to use I gotta — and I tried it before. I tried 3D Studio Max, for some reason I couldn't get into it. I'm like I I gotta learn how to do 3D.

I can't do this anymore, and I I asked Rob to let me in. You know, can I go in there at night after work? And so I'd stay up all night long after working out hours with a manual — because this was no, no, internet, this was 93, 95, yeah, 93.

With a manual, with no technical ability whatsoever, trying to figure out how to make a, character in 3D. And to make matters worse, I was making that octopus slug creature, this, amorphous creature with tentacles, which is just like. Those are two things you don't want to try to do, even if you have experience, especially back then. And so I made that character and we're like, yes, you can do 3D characters. So I started doing that and I went from being this grunt artist to being a valued commodity, because I think I've heard you mentioned several times over the years about how much more we were making.

Oh yeah, it was like every six months, every three to six months, they'd call us in and give us huge raises because people were leaving constantly, because that was like the thing to be was a 3D artist, because nobody knew how to do it. So, again, it was only because I was so upset and so disgruntled at what I was doing I became a 3D artist. Then I'm working very closely with Spencer, who was the art director on Stone keep and um, but Spencer decided to quit at the very end. He went all the way through stonekeep and then he quit. He would have been there. I'm pretty sure he would have been the art director for you if he hadn't acquit. I can tell you for sure because I found my notes and the original art director on what would become Fallout was listed as Spencer kype and I was also going to say another coincidence: do you remember how I got involved with the whole 3D artists? In that, with the sgis in that locked room, the operating system they ran was actually called Iris, which was a sub-flavor of Unix, and none of the other programmers knew eunuchs. So every time you or Kevin Beardsley or another one of the artists would run into a problem, you'd come around the corner to where my office was.

You're like could? You come fix the thing? You know the thing? I mean you had a big and I'd go and I'm like, okay, let me fix this.

I had no idea about anything. I was so on. Which again comes to our next awesome, fortuitous event.

They hire somebody who only experience in business was a. I don't know his only experience, but what he had done most recently was as a man. He was a manager of Toys R Us and he taught himself how to use 3D Max because his friend had gotten hired at Interplay with a pirated copy, which everybody did in those days.

It's, you know, I'm sure the statute of limitations is, a is expired, and so Jason's like I could do that. I'm done with this managing at Toys R Us. And so they hired him as the first official artist on your project and we could not have made this, we could not have made Fallout without Jason. Jason was the glue that — that that, like he was a translator, for between me and you, I had no idea how to do tactical stuff. I could render stuff, I could do art, I could design stuff. Obviously I ended up I could write, but I believe about that was. So here I am and I have all those engines that I had made: the voxel engine, the Sprite engine, that horrible 3D engine, um and what I wanted. I won. I needed a group of people, so who did they assign to me? A scripter, but we don't have a scripting language — and a 3D artist who's brand new to the um game scene and there's no design and there's no art style and there's not even a defined setting, and they're both named Jason. So it was. Tim and Jason's and I'm like I need help. And that's when the whole pizza party thing happened, because it was like, yeah, I need someone, I, we need a setting, we need a story. I'm not sure what to do. I don't know how to get this started.

I'm not supposed to talk about the pizzas on pizza parties in your videos, right? So, yeah, you know, I was told, well, don't go bug people. And I said I don't know what to do. So I bought pizzas. I think I bought it on my own dime because I technically didn't have a budget.

Yeah, and I just I sent out that email saying I'm gonna be in conference room three with some pepperoni and cheese pizzas after 6 pm if anybody wants to come by, and I thought like 15- 20 people would combine. I think there was seven or eight. There was there. Was um at that time at Interplay, I think I'm trying to remember in 90 that that was like 93, 94, that was 19. Still 93, no, it had to be 94.

Um. Was there more than 100 boys at Interplay at that point? We were like up to 150 or something. Yeah, it was probably mid hundreds at that point.

So, and I didn't know, I mean, I was, you know, still, even though I was, it had worked, my weapons being lead artists, which no one bothered to ever tell me. Actually, I found it as a lead artist when I saw the credits for the game for stone keep.

Um. I just, it was just, you know, I, I get this email and I'm like, oh my God, like everybody's gonna be there, this is, you know, the whole company's gonna be there trying. I mean, we get to.

Make a game from scratch with like no parameters. It's like we just get to create whatever we want. You know, I'm gonna be. It's gonna be standing room only and I show up.

There's like five people. What's funny about that is I've had people give me feedback going: how horrible were you to promote this work, life balance and take advantage of people's passion and all that? And I'm like you're viewing this through a lens, a very modern lens. This was a bunch of super excited 20-somethings who were like: we have a chance to make our own thing well, and we self-exploited?

Oh yeah, I was, I was. You know, I was as bad as any horrible boss in terms of like you know, if you, if, how could you not? How could this not be your life? You know you have a chance to make a game. You have a chance to do something really creative, and Not only was it to make a game, it was to make a game with virtually no oversight, where we could create whatever we want and you're not like giving up every minute of your day to like do This is like we have one shot at it, which you know, at the time, as you said, we were really young, I, you know we didn't realize how exploitive that was and we didn't. And in some ways, I often think that pizza party, self-selected, yeah, the Fallout group — these are people who really wanted to do it. They weren't ordered to do it, they weren't assigned to it, was just we re. There was something in us that wanted to come out and we didn't even know what it was. Well, because — and we weren't, it was more the attitude — we weren't Um, making people to go there, or I, you know, I wasn't even reviewing anybody at the time. Remember how it worked? I, like I was managing all the artists — I was the, you know, lead artists — which later was termed the art director, which technically should have been the creative director, with everything I ended up doing.

Yeah, but I don't remember ever giving — I think Rob gave everybody reviews. I don't, I never managed anybody um lucky, and it was. It was more like it was literally, was it was literally there was passionate people who wanted to do it and they seemed to all gravitate towards our project, either by choice or by being thrown on our project because nobody else wanted them and it's self-selected. I mean the people, even the people who didn't. I don't recall — I could be completely wrong about this, but I don't recall ever having a conversation.

With an artist like you're not putting in enough time. It was literally about what they were delivering. It wasn't even about how much they were delivering, because I had no idea what was.

What was, um, you know, a common amount of artwork to get done, and I had nothing to gauge it by, because I had done the stuff on Stone, keep on my own. And then, as soon as I was doing it — um, as soon as I was full-time doing characters and 3D stuff, I still was working, you know, 12, 15 hours, not because anybody asked me, but because I was just so into it and also because I felt like I was really slow, so I didn't feel like you should have to stay this long to do it I just felt like, oh it just, I'm just, that's just who I am, that's how, I work. So literally any of the problems I have with artists was 100, whether I thought they could do the job or not. And you know, people who couldn't do the job were, moved off the project and the other horrible thing that we did all the time, which is horrible to ourselves — was that after a while, me and Jason just started going like you know what, we'll just do It's like everything that started to go like we couldn't find somebody to do it.

We're just like dope, we'll do it. We just took on everything we did. You know, on the on the plus side, it really taught me a lot about making a game, because I did. I think I did everything on that game, except for actual scripting and any kind of programming. Um, in terms of I did artwork, I did, you know, writing, design, I didn't actually build Maps because we needed Scotty to do that for us, but, um, you know it was, the cool thing was, you know, we really got me and Jason were really in control of what the art looked like in a in a really big way, um, without having to. You know, Gary plattner was on the team too and he was really, you know, keyed into what we were doing. We saw his portfolio come in, there was no micromanaging, there was no, everybody was going in the right direction. Which is something I didn't realize until years later was, yeah, part of the Special Sauce is that we all, we picked a direction and just kept pointing in that direction and everybody went there, yeah, and that was special.

In fact, I've got a lot of questions about art that came up on the channel, the biggest one that people have. Asked repeatedly is to play heads. It's like: where'd the idea come from? Why did we do play heads? And why weren't there more clayheads?

Well, I know why there weren't more: because it took it took a long time to do them. So why did we even do that? Um. I believe because at that time, you couldn't scan things, you. Why not? Just what was really hard?

To make things in 3D. Uh, make organic things in 3D. It was really good at hard surface modeling, but making anything organic — and I tried to make heads from scratch and I know that some people had done it and they looked okay and you could buy pre-made heads, but what they did — is they literally — by they I mean us, as well as other people who are doing it — is you would have to take a pen and you would like have a model or a person's face and generally this. The reason they didn't do people's faces in those days as much was because you put a grid on this thing with a lot of little dots — way more than you see now when they're doing any kind of facial catch, which they don't even have to use dots anymore. But even when it became this thing that the public knew about it was a lot less dots than we had to use early on and they'd have this pen, this stylus, and they would click on a, on a DOT enter, click on the next dot enter, click on. I mean they're basically building this, uh, framework of pixels or of points that they could then generate a mesh out, a Vertex mesh. Yeah, exactly, and I think Scott was making creatures for play fighter.

What was he doing? Because he was, he wasn't. Working on D DX, DnD, must, I don't know, I thought it was. I thought he did Clay fighter and then he started doing clay models for d? D and we had him do play heads. But when did d? D start? D?

D didn't start until, like we were like a year in, right, yeah, but we didn't start the clay heads right away either, it's, so, it's it all is a jumble. I mean, I remember a bunch. I remember the stuff we did, but the timeline I wanted to ask you is my.

My notes on Art are very incomplete. I actually know when Scott started. I could look it up, but, um, I know he was Jake's, didn't he have? He had a foot pedal. At one point he stopped doing the enter key and I think, oh yeah, that's right, you go Boop, and then bam his foot. And then go boom, bam his foot, and he would do that all day long by himself.

So I have no idea where I got the idea that, like, we could make clay heads. I'm sure I talked to him and said: hey, can you make me a clay head? What was the first head? I don't remember because he made a clay head. Was it overseer?

I thought it was over. No, it wasn't, because well, what I did is I I drew a bunch of different. I drew like four or five base heads and that would make variations on those. So it would be like: here's what the head should look like and here's the different characters we can build off of that head. So Scott would make the basic head, and then I think we did tweaks in the, in the editor or in the engine, not in the engine, in power. Animator, I know you had to do the mouth, yeah, configuration. So then later, Jason, let's win.

The reason I know it's not the overseer is because I made the overseer. Like I saw Scott making heads and I said I have to make one of those every time somebody did something cool in the game. I'm like I have to do that. So like I literally, I think, did one of everything at the very least. Um, so he was making the heads and I'm like, oh, show me how to do that. And I made it was made out of this clay called Sculpey, which is really cool to work with, and so I made the overseer head. He scanned it in and then I textured it and I I made the background for it. I'm pretty sure I made the background for you. Maybe we just did a screenshot of the uh, of the Vault or something, but I was really proud of that for a number of reasons. Number one, it was just it looked really cool.

Number two was like his skin wasn't just a flat color you know he had — like people's faces are not one color. So I really put a lot of effort into figuring out how to make um across the board, actually not just on heads of like things that weren't just a block color. And at the time, if you look back at what people were doing in 3D, it was always shiny and it was always like: oh, this thing's green, so here's a green color on it was like flat, that's.

That's Jason Anderson's favorite quote in uh, our quote file. But do you know, like dude, it's hard to render dust or dirt. Yeah, it's hard to make things dirty. Or whatever.

Yeah, and it's true, because everything looked really, really clean and you had to scuff it up, so. But the other thing is, so I did the texturing on him, um. But the thing that I was really proud of — and this is the kind of thing I'd put way too much time into that probably didn't need to be done — is if you look at it and look at his hair, it's totally an impressive.

Nowadays it's probably unimpressive 10 years after I did it. But like he had a bunch of different, we called cards, right. It was like you couldn't make somebody's hair. There was way too many pixels and vertexes and all that. So you'd have to make chunks, and what I did was like I made Alpha maps that I put onto every chunk of hair that made it look like hair and I layered them.

On top of each other and it looked. It didn't look like a hair helmet, it looked like actual. I mean it was bad 3D, but it was impressive. But at the time I was like really like oh, that's so cool. It just is, it's really something you didn't see. I mean, no one had done those Talking Heads.

And even when I said we should do them, I'm like it's really cool because you can see these characters up close, we can show emotion on them and stuff. But I did realize that even at the time it was kind of like an artistic Indulgence. I was like I really want to see this, I really want to do this, I really want it to be in the game. And you know, in our Canon we had no Talking Heads and oh, but you not only used that head in in-game dialogue. That was. The opening cinematic. Yeah, I mean, that was how detailed he was. In fact, somebody asked: did you use the same models in game as used in cinematics? And that was one right there.

How about the guy walking into the desert? Is That's not the Sprite from the game. It actually started with the Sprite. The spirit. We'll see that. The thing with the Sprites is, you know, they're tiny. You're looking at them from this.

What is it? Cavalier, oblique angle. I thought you were going to say zoomed in, because that's, how we got the orthographic, Jason. Jason figured that out, just like you figured out how we're gonna tile stuff. I saw one of the questions was: um, you know how did we split up building?

So I'd be like I don't know. You'd have to ask Jason, because I made that gas station where doc morbid is. I just made it, which is, and it was, I'm sure, horribly made in terms of like trying to tile it and cut it up into tiles and like, hey, Jason, can you make this into the? And he has, like the worst thing about that is Jason invented the technique, and I think I started it and someone else finished the actual utility that cut it up, and then Scotty had to put those wall segments together by hand, yeah, and then years later would work on Arcanum. I went, you know, I could probably automate that, so you could just go zip and it would just select all the warships.

Oh, but he was, Scotty had that Focus that I rarely seen in people, where he could — just he could sit at his desk for hours doing something and he'd end up with this: the map was Flawless, there were no misplaced ground tiles, there were no misplaced wall tiles, it just looked Flawless. We ended up — and that's every time I talk about Fallout — I ended up saying how lucky or how fortunate or how coincidental that these people came together, that these things happened. Um, a lot of people wanted to know where Vault boy came from, and that was an evolution of yeah, the question, because I didn't. I didn't answer the Finish answering the question. So the model I used, what?

So we were doing isometric ones. You had to do weird things, like proportion them weirdly so that the things you wanted to stick out for their Silhouettes, you could see them at that size. So if I had just rendered it — which we did, remember that Vault 13. Um, logo me and Jason made, it was basically the guy in leather armor.

Oh yeah, that was literally, just the model and it was horrible looking because you're not supposed to view it from that angle. So I but I took the basic one and I don't even remember how I upres did, or maybe I think I actually downres it from a different model to get the one we worked with. So I went back to the basic original version and then I just — it was a naked guy and I — I think he gave me crap for this one day — I'm literally like pulling, out. You know what I'm gonna say, right, I'm like pulling out the center of his, butt, so he doesn't have this big butt crack.

You're like, what are you doing? I'm like I'm pulling the pixels out of his butt. I've seen artists do worse.

Yeah, so, so anyways. Yeah, so. Um, sorry, you had asked a question about: uh, it wasn't the same Sprite. Oh, yeah, yeah, so I made that, but then you had asked me something that I interrupted to go back. So. Yeah, gurps has. I don't remember how many skills and different things we were doing when it was gurps and I was having an artist make icons for it and I was signing off on the archives icons. I was working with them to kind of like iterate on the icons, um, and I saw him on screen in the interface and I'm like I have no idea what any of these are and no way I made these.

I art directed. I didn't make them, I art directed these. I worked with the person who's developing and to make them communicate as much as we could. I have no idea what any of these are.

It's because they were symbolic, you know. Yes, here's a hammer. Is that, yeah, or is that repair?

Well, we ended up doing that with Arcanum. So I don't know if it worked or not, but we didn't have a hundred and some skills though that too. So, anyways, I was driving home — this is the same thing. I perhaps I'm conflating these two things, but the two, the two best ideas I ever had, came. I was living in Corona at the time, which people that live in Southern California know, going from Corona — Irvine, especially during, you know, rush hours, is a long drive.

It's probably like an hour, maybe a little bit more. Um, even without traffic, it's probably good, half an hour, 45 minutes.

So I'd have to do that drive every morning and every night, and the first thing that happened was I decided — weirdly for some is our reason that I still can't quite figure out. Hey, you know, because we had been up until this time we'd be making basically Road Warrior. Um, in terms of the art, it's like everything like spikes, you know, post-apocalyptic, it was 90s science fiction. You guys had that movie going in a TV. You and Jason in your office, we had Road Warrior playing on a loop. Well, we'd have to rewind it because it was a videotape. But uh, it was constantly playing and that was. You know, that was huge.

We were just like, no, we're making our Ode To The Road Warrior. And so I hadn't really even thought — which is funny, thinking of how me and you developed games now and how we progressed. It took me a good six, eight months to even think about like, hey, we should do something kind of original, that's our own thing. It was just like I'm like it wasn't even questioned, it's just like, oh, this is our, like ripoff Road Warrior, yep, awesome. So so I was, you know, one day I'm like driving home or driving to work and I'm like it'd be really cool if this was some kind of weird post-apocalyptic version of like a 50s science fiction future and you know, retro futurism. I actually looked it up recently.

It's a term that's been around forever, so it wasn't something that that came up with Fallout, but I didn't — I don't know that I ever heard anybody mention it I had seen I was really big in Pulp, uh, into pulp science fiction. I was, you know anybody, our age. When Star Wars came out, it was like the hugest thing ever. You know, because we're in, you know, with 13, 12, 13 years old, when that first came, the first one came out and you know I'd read all the like: Star logs and science fiction magazines where they talked all about it and George Lucas — we've talked a lot about the World building and all the things that went into building that world and it. To me that was really fascinating, like all that stuff that went into it.

Um, but even then, you know, he really originally wanted to make Flash Gordon, which is a very pulpey 1930s thing, and so perhaps that was part of it. But I just like, I'm like you know the 50s aesthetic, which I wasn't, I always described it as the 50s, it was really more like 40s, but I digress um, the 50s, post-apocalyptic, you know aesthetic thing, and I came in and I remember I — I don't remember if I told you or Rob, first you looked confused and I was out that way. Yeah, well, that's true, but and then Rob was, like, Rob also looked confused. But you know, and God bless Rob, I, you know, I praise him for this all the time — it's just like he looked like he didn't know looked, he looked like he didn't know what I was quite was talking about, which I'm sure was part of me, like not describing it well, but he's like, well, you seem really passionate about it I think you should go ahead and do it.

And so we did, and so we're making a game now that we're putting in all this, 1940s, 1950s kind of retro future stuff. And then after the icon thing started happening, and I was driving home one night and I just had this vision of like Mr uh, Uncle, Penny money bags, Penny bags — I still don't always the Monopoly character. I'm like you know, we should have Monopoly cards and we need a character that. Looks like that to like, be really like. You know, like he shot a gun and his hands were exploded because the gun, because he had a critical fail, and just you know he's standing there with no hands and blood dripping off of his, arms and smiling because it's great. You know, everything's cool and I don't. So that came to me just like this weird Vision out of nowhere, and I came in and told you and — and unlike the first time I came in and told you something crazy — you immediately were like that's a really good idea, we should totally do that. Actually I've almost every. I think I wouldn't say it was Universal. Everyone on the team loved it, which is why I was so surprised when we got pushed back from Steve Jackson games because we were still hurts. I mean because he literally said: no one in the office here likes it. And I was like I find that incredible. I was incredulous because I'm like literally everybody here likes it, even people outside the team like it and they all get it.

And yeah, they didn't. No one got the, uh, the Retro feature thing until they saw it.

See, here's what I think worked for us because, like, you brought that 50s aesthetic, I liked my dark ambient music, you threw in that Monopoly stuff. The reason it all worked was it wasn't just hey, everybody had a bunch of ideas and we just threw them together. It was everybody was already making a game in a certain direction and they had various ideas that supported it. And it took me a long time to realize later when I'd worked with people like I want to do this and it's like those are all great ideas, but they don't belong in this game. Yeah, we had ideas that really did belong and they — they made Fallout, not Wasteland, like the. Chris Taylor and I were reading all these sci-fi novels, yeah, and we were like we want something like candy of libowitz, and the Brotherhood of Steel came out of that — people who wanted to preserve the past, and it all fit. It worked, and it worked with the 50s aesthetic, because you made that power armor, which is now massively iconic, the uh.

It's really funny, though, because, even though I seemingly came up with this idea out of left field, it didn't. We didn't go back and change any artwork that it already made, with the exception of the power armor, um, but that was different. Yeah, the leather jacket from Mad Max, and well, that was no, that came later, so so we had all of our armors already made. We.

Didn't change any of that. We had a bunch of artwork already made. We didn't change that, um, I think there was a little bit creeping in, even before I thought about it, because if you look at alien, the first alien, like their aesthetic was a huge influence and it's very World War II bomber, like that cockpit literally has pieces of World War II bomber in it, like the switches and stuff were literally off of Old World War II um airplanes, as far as I remember. And so we were already kind of like influenced by that, but it hadn't become official. Um, and then like, but when I said when I made that change, when we made that change, it didn't change anything, it didn't change.

Well, and I really looked back on it now and I'm like we were making like this B movie, weird pulpy sci-fi thing already. Without even making that as a decision. It just was like our personalities. It was the stuff we were all into. Um, you know, the, vibe, the tone of it wasn't something we designed. It was literally the tone of Fallout is literally how it was when the five or six of us — whatever it was — we're sitting in the conference room talking about what we thought the game would be, the jokes we'd made that we thought were going to be funny in the game, some of which never made it in, like Irvine um and Brian Fargo's collar and all that stuff. It's a Viper, um, all that. You know, none of that would have fit eventually, but it was literally like just kind of, we just went in that direction, like you're saying, and, um, you know I, to this day, I I think it was kind of like.

In the back of my brain or something. But another big influence was this, comic book called hard-boiled, which was really kind of like a, weird retro feature thing too, which we, uh, we put the gun from that in there. We also put the Blade Runner gut in there and it was just um. To me that's when it started to really gel. It was like all of a sudden we'd been kind of running, I feel like on um, like just kind of going with our instincts. But it's like when we first, when we, when we changed to that and then came up with the Vault boy, it like really started to focus everything we were doing.

Um, you know, the pit boy was you know, a cross between the Jetsons and Bob's Big Boy. Um, The Mad Max armor was funny because we already had leather armor. And Chris Taylor came to me and he's like we need another armor set. And, um, it's supposed to be in between leather and leather. Was our base one, right? The original leather?

Yep, it's supposed to be between that. And, oh wait, did it? I don't remember where it ended up being, but anyways, we needed to fill this slot because, from design standpoint, we needed it. And I go like again. I have no idea what I thought of this, probably because there's the road we're playing in the background at the time.

I'm like, if I made it look like the road warrior, would that, would that fit the fit what you're looking for? He's like, yeah, that would totally work. And I literally made it look exactly like Mel Gibson in the road warrior, the outfit he was wearing, everything you know, I, today, we.

Probably get sued but that doesn't fit anywhere in our 1950s aesthetic. But — and that was an announce that we decided to do that. And then that inspired because he had dogs in the game. It inspired someone to try to put in dog meat and make it a come to you because you're wearing the Mad Max outfit. The um, the whole discussion about how Ink Spots got picked, yeah, was something that's come up as a question of. Like we didn't plan on that, it just happened.

Yeah, uh, a couple years back I think it was more making the original The Outer Worlds Brian. Someone had contacted Brian to interview him about the intro and he's he said: you know, I don't know much about it, you should talk to Leonard because he's the one who put it together and, um, and he always loved it I mean, that's, the thing you know. I I saw your other video about how no one really got in her PL. I never really got it at Interplay, um, until Brian played it and said it was cool and then all of a sudden it was like, oh, everybody can be into it.

Now they've got permission. Um, they were allowed, but I do remember, like we made the intro and Brian saw the intro and he said something along the lines of we can do something that's kind of like art or something like that. This is Art, you know, as opposed to just a video game. This feels like art and I was like he totally gets what we're doing, which had been not the case up until that point. Um, well, remember when you did the new Interplay logo, we got a little pushback on that because we were supposed to use the standard Interplay laser.

That. Was from the intro itself, from the, that was from the intro itself. Yeah, we did that. The Galaxy News Network — you did that.

Anyway, we weren't supposed to make our new logo but you just said, ah, this will look good, and then I liked it I, I feel like that was my idea, but I could have. It could have totally been Jason saying we should use that me and Jason sat in the same office like we could argue all day long about whether me or him or came up with certain things, because I feel like we were kind of like one mind at that point. It's hard to attribute things because yeah, you discuss them and then later on the other person would go: wasn't that my idea? It's like I don't know. I thought it was my idea, I thought I brought it up, but I thought I'd already thought of it.

Yeah, that's how close we all were. Yeah, and that's. That's happened several times where it's kind of like — and sometimes it wasn't like, no, I came up with that idea and you came up with it wasn't either, it was wrong. We like literally came up with the idea independent of each other and like would show up with it. Do you know what was interesting about that? I don't know if you watched when I did a video about where the name for Fallout came up. The name Fallout is in the list of things that we. I was surprised by that. I didn't remember that I had it's on a dated um.

What I do remember is Jason always wanted to name games more about the world, and remains is and remains of the day was a joke. It was. He wasn't serious, it was, like there was, like you know, The English Patient. There was like some th Lawrence novel or movie at the time, so Jason was just throwing out stuff like that. Hey, it went on the list.

Yeah, I, I we're horrible at naming things. Um, definitely, but anyways, back to the Ink Spots. So it the reason I got it sidetracked by the whole Brian thing was because, um, when I did that interview, I really sat. I don't think I ever really thought about this. I'm like: well, where did that come from? Like, what was I trying to do?

Because, we — we me and Jason — designed what the intro was going to be based on off our constraints. I know we say this all the time in interviews, but like constraints are really good because they make you be creative. We're like we cannot show people close up it is impossible at that point in time to do really good looking people, which is why we had to do clay heads close up. We can get into why we didn't go 3D, because we had at one point we were considering, well, they're going to be a first person 3D game. Um, so we started with a list of like what can't we do? Can't show people close up, well, we want to show people at some point. So how do we do that?

What if it's like a, like a grainy documentary, and not only that, it's like on a television set that by the time you see the people, the camera's already kind of pulled back, and that kind of coincided with us like coming up with the idea of like this was a ruined building, and so I had this vibe in my head of what I wanted it to feel like. It was very melancholy, very kind of sad and somehow poignant. I didn't know what I was like chasing, but it's like I kind of knew what I wanted it to be and so we tried to start looking for a song like what's the music gonna be, what? What do I want to do?

Now, when I did this interview, uh, that Brian had set me up with, um, I realized it was a combination of like at the beginning of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, there is a really kind of melancholy piano playing by itself and you hear the, film projector, and they're showing this, uh like a silent movie version of Butch casting the sunnance kid, which ironically, they had actually made for part of the movie and they cut it. So they're like we have this laying around. So it happens in every industry.

They're like we have the slant around, we use it for the intro and it was really kind of like haunting, and then the other, combined with the end of doctor Strangelove, where they're playing We'll Meet Again by Vera Lynn as the bombs are dropping, and if I had remembered that I would have tried to get us to be to use We'll Meet Again by Vera Lynn, because you know that that which would have been two on the nose, yeah, so thankfully I didn't remember that, but I I knew what I wanted, but I didn't know what it was. And Gary plattner brought in — I don't remember where he got it I don't think he just mentioned. I think he actually brought in the CD or something, was it? No, he had a shoebox of CDs. I remember at one point: no, you're thinking about. No, you're. Uh, we'll get to that in. A second, so he brought in.

I don't want to set the world on fire. He could have just said it because I knew what it was will. It was actually even in the first, um, the very first trailer, I think, for Blade Runner. You can find it online. It's in there because they're really trying to sell that as a Noir future Noir kind of thing. Uh, and the minute he said that, I'm like, yes, that is awesome.

Not only is it got that weird haunting sound, it also is this bad joke, right? I don't want to set the world on fire. We already did. Yeah, it's You know, when you think about it's kind of like, uh, couldn't we go a little bit deeper than that and put you on the nose? So again, luck, reared its ugly head and they're like, nope, they wanted too.

Much money for it, so Charles deanan had these cases, these big boxes of like — they were like binders — of um CDs with — I think it was songs from the 30s to the 50s or something like that, and there had to be four or five of them. There were huge boxes be.

Jason literally spent a couple of days just loading up these CDs and skipping between songs till we found one. And then one day I'm skipping through these CDs and I land on one and I'm like, oh, this is just, I don't want to set the world on fire. And he starts singing and I'm like this isn't, I don't want to set the world on fire. It wasn't until later that I realized that most of their songs pretty much sound like that. But I'm like, holy, we can use this, um, I think. So we went and got.

The licensing for that um. And that was before we had decided we were kicking the The Vault dweller out of the vault, which I will go on record as saying I thought that was a bad idea. I thought it should be a big party with balloons and a cake, exactly.

Well, there's two things. One, well, there's. You know. Again, great ideas come out of constraints. Because our original idea for the — the battle in the documentary at the intro or the news footage in the intro — was literally just, we're gonna see a battle between two sides, like, okay, number one, that's going to be really hard to do. Number two, that's not a story. There's like nothing happening there.

Do we just want a shot of that? We should do something cool, and so I turned to Jason and I'm like, hey, Jason, I'm going to have him go up. And basically execute a guy Point Blank rage and I'm going to have the guy, um, wave at the camera.

Should I do that? And of course Jason starts egging me on um, and you know we do that stuff all the time. And then, um, you know, when I said like let's kick the guy out of the vault, which again everything goes back to the road War, because the thing at the end of the road warrior, Road Warrior was a great movie for me. It became a classic at the end when it turned into a myth.

And they start, you know, and he's the, you know the lone Wanderer, the is like left standing there and like you know he's, basically exiled. He exiled himself, but he's exiled from the tribe.

And so the minute either me or Jason came up with that, or we both. Came up with it simultaneously, I was just like we have to do that and I don't know if you know this, but I was going to do it regardless if you told me I could or not. So I know it now. How does that? How exactly?

But, um, so when we did that, it's like all of a sudden, I'm like the only reason we picked maybe was because it sounded like I don't want to set the world on fire, yeah. And then I'm like, wait a minute if you like listening. And at first I'm like, okay, that's kind of like maybe you'll, I'll come back again someday, maybe, which is kind of works with the intro, because it's like it's Humanity as a whole saying: maybe I'll come back someday, um. But then we kicked him out of the Vault. I'm like, if we use the if, we use the music for this, it turns into a song about. It's like it works for the intro and it becomes personal. If I ever, when you told me that I remember when you said, and here's a song we picked and it's perfect for the beginning and it's perfect for the end, and I was like, oh, and then I think I told you that Christmas I went home, found out it was my mother and my grandfather's favorite band — yeah, the ink spots — and that my mother had gone. My, grandfather had taken my mom to a concert of theirs when she was like four or five, got in trouble with my grandmother for keeping, you know, baby Margie out that long.

But it was just weird how many things was. It was just weird how many things like that happened. And afterwards we're like that was, that was complete. I mean, Gary just happened to find that song and then you happen to be going through a box that that Charles happened to have, and there were so many things that were not mistakes, or there were so many things that weren't quite what we were trying to do. Like if I, like I said, if I had remembered the end of Doctor Strange — Love is what I was trying to copy — I would have gone like, let's use, let's see if we can get that song.

Um, we couldn't get. I don't want to set the world on fire, which was, to me, not as good of a choice as maybe um, you know all along the way, you know, going back to our the start of this conversation, if Spencer hadn't acquit, I would never been the art director, I wouldn't have looked the way it did. We. Can go back before anybody was on the team.

If I was a better programmer, thought might have been a 3D game. No, well, the engine was terrible, well, there was that. I remember us actually talking about it and I was just like, no, we can't do that because 3D sucks. 3D games at that point in time were ugly and like you had five. I mean, look at the original Tomb Raider which came out right around that time. They did a great job with using that. But I was like, really, coming from my background, I was really into the Fidelity of, like the detail and the grime and the grit. Um, which the other thing that I was, I spent so much time on things no one noticed or no one cared about.

You know how Jason said it was so tough to make things dirty, but we had. We had to. Pallet.

We had a 256 color palette. There's 128 actually, though, because we have this is a reserve, some for the interface and for color cycling, so you did lose some of that so, anyways, we had this and we would do this thing where we had to pallet true color images. We run it through this program on a Mac called the battleyzer um, which, because you could only do it for a certain number of files at a time, we had to come up with these weird batch files and we couldn't do them all at once because there was too many files. It was just, it was archaic, but anyways. So when you did that, you would, it would pixelate and the pixels would move on it, and, ironically, I learned how to do this in my first job, where I was cutting things out of background and it would cut away parts of the characters.

I'd have to go in and pixel it. But if you made it too smooth or made it to like, well, I'll just put this color in here. It didn't work because it was like the rest of it had these pixels moving all around it, so you actually had to go in there and make bad pixelization, fake. You had the fake bad pixelization so it would work. So when I was doing that stuff, we were palleting it — I would make Textures in a way — and I'd spend way too long in this — where the pixelization would happen in such a way that it made it look dirty, not like it was low-res, so it's like the way we made things look dirty is we had this thing in classic uh, game development or artist.

I'm sure programmers do this too every time you're making. A new, a new executable or whatever. We have this thing called nwall and the reason was called and wall is because I started with wall and then it was AWOL and it was b-wall. When I got to end it was this. It was like rust, I think, and it was a couple things I put together in Photoshop with different layers, where it was just one image where just had this weird um, uh, juxtaposition of different colors that we would use — and I use that for people's skin and I sometimes it was exactly what I would use. Sometimes I would just use that as like an overlay to show where different colors would, all these different things we do. But that, coupled with our pixelization, to me was like our stuff looks like it's not necessarily pixelated, it looks like it's dirty and it looks like it's dusty and no one ever picked up on that. People are like: why is it so kind of gray and grungy looks?

Do you remember how much time we spent making sure that when people walked their feet didn't slide? And, yeah, I mean, no one cared how much hours you and I lost to it personally. And then Diablo comes out and it's like super slidy and no one cared. We did that a lot I.

It's tough though, because like even now, like in my gut, I'm like: would I have like made the choice not to do that? Yeah, no, I would have made people, not I could. It was so cool to me and that's the thing we were. So at least I was, and I know Jason, you were — I'm sure a lot of people were like this on the team. I was so into every little thing I did. It's this like when I was doing anime.

I'd never animated before — well before, stonekeep, um, I don't. I didn't do any human animation in stone keep because we had the full video for human beings — um. But I was animating these characters and I was making sure the weight distribution worked and that, like you could see him push off and that there was no like weird Jitter when they went back to their stand pose again.

Things we could have really just kind of like fudged our way through and I don't know that people noticed it or even noticed it now. But I personally believe in this could just be justifying my own obsessions. I really believe it makes a difference. I really believe it makes it feel more weighty. It feels more grounded to me. I think all of us had things that we wanted, something. Done to a certain quality level, yeah, and even though maybe individually those weren't noticed, but I think all together it kind of made the game feel a little richer. I don't know it's hard to, I think. So it's like when I tell people this is not a science, that's why we didn't have it planned, where there weren't details and all that.

There's as much art going into this and you're doing it as feel and you know what's interesting is. I just looked. We've been talking for an hour. We can only like another three hours of the Fallout questions and I had Fallout two questions, Arcanum questions. Did we get through? Did we have through all of the follow-up questions that people would ask? I? I was gonna jump into Fallout 2 and even try to do Arcanum, but it's been an hour. We've talked about this at length, but the last.

Thing that we never — we kind of touched on it but we didn't really go into it — is, you know, the fact that, Steve Jackson, you know again another lucky thing because I, I remember I went, I picked you up from the airport — I think it was Christmas or Thanksgiving. You had gone home, uh, to visit your family. I pick you up from the airport, and this is when I was 100.

On the art side, um, we had done a lot of the early design together. That's why I put in the manual the original game design by the original five or six people who were, who were in The Pizza meetings where we basically came up with the heart of what Fallout was going to be, including Scott Campbell, who doesn't get talked about a lot. Yeah, like he, you know, he came up with the name for Junktown. He came up with a lot of our settings, our gun that made it into the final game, but, um, so I was like asking you, I'm like you know. So, on the design side, what do you think? You know, is this going to be a good game? Is this, are people going to like this? And you're just like, I think this is going to be a fantastic groups game, but I don't think other people are gonna get this.

It's just too complex, there's too much going on. It's really like It's just really fit and just like you did with temple, it's like when we got into something that was a pre-existing thing, we got hardcore. It's just like we wanted it to feel like Dungeons & Dragons. We wanted it to feel like Gertz. We didn't want to cut corners and that was what you guys had done. You made this Very um, true to gerp's thing, with as much stuff as you could put in it that would work in a video game or not quite work, as it turned out. So you were kind of a little bit bummed. You were like I think we're making something great here, but I don't think it's gonna really turn out like we think it is, because the gerps thing is just too difficult and I don't know how much longer it was.

After that that Steve Jackson, you know, got all upset about the intro and the vault, you know. And again, you know the fact that Brian told him you that, the fact that Brian told him, you know, the reason we put the Brian Fargo presents. Besides him just letting us make this game is like, at that point, you know, if Steve Jackson started talking lawyers and instead of like being you know what. A lot of, what a lot of business would have done, was like it's just not worth the house, so we're not going to deal with it, Brian was like no, I like what these guys are doing, I'm not gonna, I'm gonna tell him to take that stuff out. And you know it was again: it's like I couldn't, I, I can't, I don't have any idea what those people were saying in terms of you know, the violence which I haven't seen, the setting people on fire, by the way. Well, the other thing too: when I was talking — I don't know if you saw my video yesterday where I want people to approach this with Nuance.

Steve Jackson is also not the bad guy in this — they really thought, well, I have to be careful, because gurps is our brand and we have to protect it. Yeah, I think our what we were. Thinking was: I love girls, I fought to get girls, I wanted it, I was the one who was like promoting it.

At the same time, Fallout had become this thing that maybe wasn't fitting with gerbs. And I think that was that discussion on the ride home from the airport of we have this great game and I have this great set of libraries that that Implement gurps rules and they're not quite connecting. And then to discover a month later, well, they don't like some of the stuff on the Fallout side.

We're like, well, I don't want to get rid of that, I don't want to go to either of them. So I actually thought, because I was told, oh, separate it, make noodle. Because I was like, hey, everything's a library, I can plug it out. And they said: we'll use your library for another game, yeah, and I just was like okay, and I, I didn't question it, I just went: okay, that's what, that's what will happen.

Well, it again shows why we're horrible business people and way too obsessed with our, the work we do because we knew that gurps was probably hurting the project, we would have fought to make a group's game, even though we knew that it probably wasn't what was best for the project. Because we set out to make a group's game, we were going to make a group's game, we were committed to making a girps game. We would have made a groups game if he hadn't, you know, if that hadn't happened. It's weird, that number of things that happened that at the time felt horrible, yes, and then later, sometimes months later or years later, we were like, oh, thank goodness that happened. But then, as usual, people are like: oh, let's make a story about the, heroes and villains of this real thing that happened and it's like people can't even imagine.

Well, there's got to be a bad guy here. I'm gonna try to figure out who it is. There's. It isn't really a bad guy, there's just a situation happened that did not have an optimal solution. I you know that this. We've told this story many times. I'm sure you've covered it of, like how we ended up doing the cover again. It was because of the obsession thing it's like. So I had designed that. I don't even know if you remember. I still have the, drawing of it. This really bad 90s sci-fi looking power armor looks nothing like the power armor in the game we had.

Actually, I actually done it and it took a long time to do all those animations because he couldn't do something. With it seems like he might have been able to, but you tried to figure it out, Jason tried to figure out. If you and Jason couldn't figure out, I'm pretty sure we couldn't do it at that time, where it had been great if we could have just had it automatically copy animations over, we had to like open up both files and like hand copy animations over so we had all the animations for all the different animations a character could do, but every time we put in a new armor we had to hand copy them over, and I did so. I was making the intro and I had to do a close-up of that power armor helmet and I started to model the one I had that was based, you know, based on this drawing, the one that was in the game, and within like maybe an hour I was like this is crap, I'm not gonna make this. And I started thinking, um, and this is probably around the time that we discovered City lost children, because I know that's where the, eyepiece thing, came from.

Yeah, um, I just started building this thing from scratch. Like I never could have drawn This was totally out of my Wheelhouse in terms of like concepting stuff. But I just started modeling this thing from scratch with nothing. I just had this vague image of my head, of a feeling I wanted from this thing a very industrial thing again.

That's not really. You don't look at that and go 50s. That's like just our. You know this hardcore mechanical thing like you know the cockpit behind me, that that Tor made for the. You know one of our original concepts for The Outer Worlds: um, tour Frick, by the way, awesome.

Concept artist, if anybody wants to, wants to give him work, um, you know. So I just started making that helmet and I got so into it I would come in on the weekends and spend the whole day, just, you know, making this really really high res version of it was going to be shrunk down for the intro. We had no other plans for it, was only going to be there. But I loved it so much I'm like I'm gonna make it. And then, on top of that, I went in and on my own time and remade the rest of the government and recopied it for you know, which, of course, was not a not an easy thing to do. And then, when push came to shove and we had to make our own cover, we had this high-res version of it because I was so obsessive about what I was. Doing and I remember — like every story seems to cycle back to us being crazy obsessing with us wanting to make this game. I remember you working on it and I looking occasionally and what I remember: they not only had a cool texture on them, but the way they had the ridges and I was like, are we gonna see that you did any? You did in the box cover.

It was funny because we went to — uh, we went to a class on how to use, um, how to use power animator, after having worked with it for three years. So they started to have these classes because more people were using it. So we went to this thing and there was this thing. I can't, I can't remember. It was an animation, something and I thought it was ant for animation. It was like something where you had a spline and you could animate something along it, but what that did is you created a model by animated.

I had no idea what that was. I never even looked it up because I'm like this is something to do with animation. It's not, it's too advanced for me. And they showed us that and I'm like I wonder if you can scale those. So, like, I did this thing with a big, a big circle and a small circle going on a spline and I don't remember how it works. But like, and then you animate it and it made that and I spent like probably a good day like playing around with the size of how big each of those should be, what the actual curve was from the back of the helmet. Yeah, the obsession. Luckily we had the energy of Youth to do that.

Yeah, it's, funny. You're making me think of all the things I obsessed about, like I hated the random number generator that came with our C compiler, so we started making our own and we finally picked one out of a book I think called numerical recipes and see, it was like, and I we were like. It had a period and a chi-square that was beyond anything we would need for a game, which is why I was shocked when QA started complaining. They're like: hey, I had I missed three times in a row when I had a 95 chance and I was doing the math on the Whiteboard going: this can happen. In fact, this should happen about once a week in your testing.

And it was just. Why did I even do that? Why didn't I just go?

Every other game probably ships with the brand from the C library. I'll just use that, but no, that wasn't good enough. It wasn't. You know that. I think that was just us. Yeah, that's just what we did, but, um, yeah, it's been like 15, 20 minutes since you said we should be done. Let's stop here, and you know what? Maybe you can come back at some point.

I got questions about Fallout 2, well, I should say I do. People have put questions in the channel and I've extracted them: Fallout 2, Arcanum, vampire, things. I literally can't answer, either because I wasn't involved or it was an art thing and I only watched it being done and I don't really know the answers. Or Quest stuff. There's some Quest stuff in there that only you know the answer to, yeah, if I even remember.

We'll see, maybe no one will watch this and we won't be obligated to do anymore. Well, thank you for doing it, and maybe I could ask you to do it again. I'm sure you could. I'm sure you have my phone number. You can give me a call. I know where you live exactly. All right, talking to you. We'll talk to you later.
