+++
title = "Recognizing Good Coworkers"
date = "2025-05-07"
id = "eGuEx9Df44Q"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers"]
summary = "I talk about how to recognize those coworkers that you really want to work with, on multiple projects for many years."
references = ["GqNcNtxHU6E", "UZJ-1AS4UKA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about recognizing good co-workers — and by good I mean good for working with, for you.

And I wanted to talk about this because making games is very stressful. I'm sure that's come out in my videos and you see all kinds of behaviors from people when they're stressed. And I wanted to talk about that because, if you're lucky, you can find some people that you really love working with and that together you make really good games with, and you can stick with those people for decades I have. Now, when people get stressed, there's some people that fall into one of two camps: either they just start saying yes to everything, they're just they're yes, men, that's a great idea, Tim. That's a great idea. Let's do it, and they're doing this because they just want to avoid argument. They just tell me what to do, I'll do it.

And while it seems nice, you're not having any discussions on things, aren't getting improved, conversely. There's a lot of people that just fall into the no camp. They're just like: no, no. I've worked with not one, but two programmers who got a nickname because of how frequently they would say no, and this was often done. They did it because they didn't see an immediate solution to what you were asking for and they didn't want to spend any more time looking for Solutions. And they — they were stressed, they were already had a lot on their plate and you were effectively walking into their office going. I had this idea and it throws a lot more stuff on your plate. So the stress is stuff that exists.

But I want to talk about people agreeing with you or disagreeing with you and how that should factor into whether you want to work with them. Many people disagree with you, but not for reasons you think: um, I've disagreed with. People — some co-workers, I've even argued with them — but in the end, we respect each other and we've worked with each other for decades and I want you to be able to have that experience. And that's what it really boils down to. You can work with people as long as you respect them and they respect you, even if you don't always agree, and that's really important. A lot of people think the agreement is the important part, but it's not. It's the respect part, because when, as soon as people lose any respect for you or you lose respect for them, it's really hard for you guys to work together and the game development becomes really really hard and the game will suffer. So how can you tell, how can you see that respect from others?

It's not anything. I think you should go by what they say, because there are people who are super quiet and they don't say things, and then there's other people who you know blow smoke and we'll tell you: walk, all kinds of things. So I try to make this constructive, and also by action. So this is like an action-based list of if you to look at someone and go do I think that person respects me? And the first one is: are they truthful to you? So when they're disagreeing, is it because they actually think that their idea is better and they want to discuss it with You want people like that because some people will lie to you.

I' I've talked about that. People will just lie to your face in this industry. And, even worse, they're Lie by Omission. They know something but they don't tell you because there's some end result they want and if you knew something, they would not. Tell you, so pay attention to how people talk to you and there's a side bar on this.

Sometimes people just will bypass you. They don't want to lie to you, either by commission Omission, so they go around you and get other people to do something they want — and I've talked about this — and then either they lie about doing it or they tell the people they told it to lie to you and it all comes down to just a huge mess. So that's why I always tell you: pay attention to what people do, not to necessarily what they say. And then another way to tell if people are being respectful is watch how they treat people, because this goes into like how you should treat people fairly. Um, let's talk about like treating me fairly if you call me out on things that I had absolutely no, no control over.

You know I was screamed at once for having chickenpox for 2 weeks and how this was costing the company money and moving a ship date. Yeah, like I really wanted to get Chickenpox and strep throat at the same time and run4 degree fever and have hallucinations that I was at a depes mode concert. Totally my choice. Another way that people might treat you unfairly is I've had people hold me to standards that no one else got held to like. I literally have been punished with not pro getting a promotion or a bonus because of something that no one else was being held to. Um, I've mentioned this before about you know, when sometimes I get held responsible for things on games where I wasn't the lead in charge of that area or there were two leads and yet I'm responsible and not the other person. So I watch when people do this and I'm like that person doesn't treat people fairly. But something that triggers me personally more than treating me unfairly, is if I see you treating other people unfairly. Uh, a friend of mine said that that is my trigger. When I see someone treating someone else very unfairly, I just go off on them and especially when that other person can't react like I once yelled at my boss for yelling at someone on my team and he pulled me aside later and goes: how dare you disrespect me like that in front of the team? And I'm like you were disrespecting that employee. You could have talked to him later, but you chose to yell at him in front of a team meeting, so I chose to yell at You don't like it, don't do it was that kind of thing, this. He wanted to act a certain way. But how dare anyone act like that with him? And that was super annoying for me.

But, by the way, this is a way: if you're really looking for people you want to work with, you can also watch how they work, how they act outside of work. Um, I once watched a coworker at lunch absolutely berate a waiter for no reason, just was going off about stupid stuff that that the waiter had no control over. By the way, when we were all leaving I said I had to go use the bathroom and instead I went back, added extra tip and told the waiter I would be coming back to this restaurant, but not with that coworker. And that cooworker went on: my do not work with list.

Don't know if he knows cares. It was decades ago, but I never worked with that person again because I have had a teacher once. That said: watch how people treat children and, uh, animals. And I added to that: service people — people in retail and who are providing you Services, people. If people treat those people badly, who knows how they're going to act if you have to work with them and God forbid, they ever become your boss.

So that's a big sign to look for. Another and probably the a big one.

A sign of disrespect you can look for is when someone is talking to someone who's an absolute expert in some area and they start their sentence with: can't you just — and I've seen this in everything — can't you just change the ey to the AI to do this? Can't you just interpolate the missing frames in that animation? Can't you just swap the? And they're talking to someone who's an absolute expert at this and they have never done It's one thing, if I'm talking to another programmer and I'm like, can't you just? But if I'm talking to an artist, I would never just say can't you? Just because I don't know anything about art, I'm not good at judging it, I've never done it. So I watch people who do that — and I know some people do it frequently and basically what they're doing is they're completely disrespecting experts in other fields, even though they have don't have an iota of expertise in that field.

So what does all this come to? I I basically want to tell you, disagreeing with co-workers is fine. In fact, it's a good idea, when you disagree with someone, it may be because they're coming up with a different idea for a feature, they're coming up with a different solution to a, design or programming issue, or they're coming up with a different process. It may be a producer and they're like you know if we did, if we reordered these tasks or we did something early, their process may be better than yours. I have a whole video on ideas of mine that got rejected because someone else came up with a better idea.

So that's why you want that disagreement. You want someone to feel like they can come up to you and go: I don't agree with something we're doing, but here's even better than that. Sometimes their idea isn't better than yours. It works better with yours, so they may have an idea for something and when they tell you're like you know what we could do. We could do elements of both of these and the result would be a lot better.

You will never get that synergy unless you are open to disagreement with people and talk about stuff. And what worries me is if you stop working with someone because you disagree with them, or you don't aren't friends with someone, or even you stop watching a YouTuber because you disagree with them. I mean, I've seen people leave comments on here that I'm not going to call anyone out, but the paraphrase is: Tim, I've agreed with everything you've said up till now, but I don't agree with this. I've got to unsubscribe. I'm like okay, but if you're, if, you're, if, one disagreement is going to make you write someone off forever, you're going to live in a very, very small circle and it's going to be a bubble of people. Only agree with you 100%, and let me just tell you're not going to get better games out of that little bubble. So what I'm telling you here, as constructively as possible, is: relish finding people who disagree with you. Just make sure that the people who disagree with you still respect you in all the ways I've talked about. If you can find those people, hang on to them. Your games will be better for it, and I've found a few people like that that I've literally worked with for over 30 years, so I hope you find those people too.
