+++
title = "Sometimes I Hate VO"
date = "2024-09-30"
id = "ETCLEt-PEPM"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design"]
summary = "I talk about how having voice over in my games has frustrated me over the years."
references = ["UkXOppoyJaM", "5l7YcGCQ5Ck"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about how sometimes I hate voiceover, hate.

I hate what it does to me as a game designer: reaches deep into my game design soul and just punches it and nobody acknowledges it and everybody's like: vo is great, wonderful. Now let me just say before I continue, there are times where I think voice over elevates games.

Trust me, I wrote the intro to Fallout that everybody likes, the one about war never changing, and all that did. I think what I wrote was fantastic, the, a perfect diamond of writing.

No, but Ron Pearlman took that and he elevated it to something people still talk about today, 27 years later. It was used in the TV show.

It's been in a lot of the games already, that's something I think. I tapped into, something in my writing that Ron proman elevated Way Beyond anything I could have done without vo. But — and here comes a big butt — vo causes all kinds of problems and as a game designer, programmer and producer, it has just wrecked me in all three of those fears over and I want to walk down what the problems are. The first one isn't as big a deal anymore, but all the others still are and I hope that people who think vo's great and they're mad about Ai and doing vo and all that literally listen to what I'm saying here and try to understand this alternate view. In fact I'm wondering if I should do a video about I try to understand everyone's point of view on things. I think it's weird when people say this is dumb or you're wrong and they don't even put zero effort and understanding why the other person is saying this.

So let me walk down all the problems vo has caused me over the years. First of all, voice over takes up dis space. Now this: was a problem back when you were floppies and it's the main reason we probably could have had vo earlier than it was, because we just couldn't fit it on the floppy. Once we got CDs and we suddenly went from 1.4 mag on a floppy to 700 Meg on a CD.

Suddenly it's like, okay, let's do voiceover and that was great sort of. But there are still other problems, and also, next time you complain about a big download, most of that's due to the really high resolution Graphics, because everyone wants 4K now on their big you know screen. But some of it is vo, it's just it's taking up extra space. The other problem vo causes is it takes a long time to process and put vo into the game you put. I mean you have to hire a voice actor, they have to read the lines, they have to be recorded. In a professional studio, they have to be sent to someone who will chop up those lines into individual lines that can be tagged in a way that the game can then find them in some kind of sound database and insert them into the game. If you want lip syncing, that has to be done.

In a lot of cases it can be automated now. But that software you have to buy or you have a person to do it. That's somebody you have to pay for. Often it's done automatically and then a person comes in and cleans it up and so you're paying both. So money vo means more money spent on the game. Now this is especially true if you want everyone in the game to have vo, because I've done games where important people have vo and other people don't, and that was primarily done for because of money. Remember I said most of the reason for things is money.

But the other problem vo causes — that everybody in the game industry knows about and a lot of people outside the game industry don't — is voice over locks your dialogue down earlier in the process than nonv Tech um text. It used to be the case where if you discovered a bug in the game and the fix for it was to change what someone said, you could literally do that up until the day before you went gold and shipped your discs off to be mastered or stuck it up on Steam to be downloaded. You can't do that with vo, because if you change a line that's voice overed, you need to get that actor back in the studio to record the new line. So it's really a problem. This is why, by the way, in Fallout there was a character who told you something and then, when that dialogue ended, another — and it was a vood character, a non-v character — ran over and said: oh no, we just got new evidence that this group has changed its location, so you need to go south instead of north or whatever they said.

That's why we could literally not bring that voiceover back into the studio. We didn't have the money or the time the biggest thing that gets me is — you know if you watched this Channel that I love reactivity in my games. I can't have much, very much, reactive dialogue if it's voice overed, because what I want to do for reactivity is either prohibitive, is either prohibited or prohibitively expensive if you use vo. Let me go into detail, if you watched my video — and I'll link it below — on arcanum's generated dialogue, you know that there was a bunch of things we did to create reactivity in that game. We had generated dialogue, which I C op codes that would lead to whole Banks of phrases like greetings and goodbyes and do you want to barter and do you want to purchase a spell for me or do you want healing, which sped up writing dialogue tremendously. But it meant all of those banks, that those generated dialogue, all those Banks of lines had to be indexed and if you, if they were applied to a character that was voed, every voice actor you hire has to say: every line in every bank, which there were a lot of banks, because we wanted a lot of reactivity, money, and time. Um, there were also some things that were constructed sentences. So, um, I'm trying to think of some of the ones we used, but when we put two, you would grab from different banks and put: them together.

There's no good way to do that with vo, because if you're, what you're doing is you're inserting the character's name in there. You can't do that. Um, you've seen games where they try to do it by pre-recording a bunch of names so they can insert the player's name in there, but then you pick a name they don't have and it just doesn't know what to do, or it inserts you or the chosen one or whatever, generic phrase you have for the player. But constructed sent sentences can't be done if you vo. You also can't have a lot of emotion based lines, and what I mean by that is I was always hoping that in my games I could have reactivity based on states of the play of the NPC, so the NPC, depending on their state, would say the same line differently, for example reaction level, if there's an NPC who hates you, is very angry at you, their barter line may be: do you see anything you like?

As opposed to the neutral. Do you see anything you like versus the happy to see you. Do you see anything you like?

Same line said wildly different ways because the basis for it is different, the emotional basis for it is different. Oh my God, you would have to. One line of text would become three lines of VO and you'd have to have them all recorded. But there's also one, just that. About other states? What about the health state? If you have a really wounded NPC, you might want them to say something like: oh it's good to see you again, as opposed to oh it's good to see you again. Now, keep in mind that um factors in that that is a multiplicative with the reaction level.

If they hate you and they're wounded, it's like, uh, it's good to see you again, versus they're happy to see you, but wounded — oh, it's really good to see you again it's just a weird thing. Where you, can't do all that, it's basically it's. It gets prohibitive because that's multiplicative, if you have four different reaction emotion levels and three different Health levels, that's a dozen different ways of doing vo for the same text line. Now there are games where the player got vo as well and what they usually do. There is either all the vo and all the dialogue is spoken with one voice over um actor. So you're just locked and you've all played games like that, where you get to make your appearance but you sound exactly the same, no matter what your player character is like, or there's a limited vo set. You can pick from, but it's only used for things like being hit or um, a greeting or whatever, like hey, or they get hit like uh, it's. They have voice actors, do you know?

Maybe 20, 30 of these reactive things and that's what use. But when you go into dialogue, the player is still on voed. Okay, that's what I don't like about vo, but really that's what I don't like about human vo. There is another, there's another option now and it's becoming a better and better option: AI vo. It can fix all the problems i' I mentioned. You can generate it on the fly, so you don't have to store it can have different emotion levels. It can have different Health levels. You can use it for generated dialogue, you can use it for constructed sentences, you can use it for player names, but dot two.

Problems with it. One: it doesn't sound as good and I'll admit it. Humans vo actors are way better than AI vo actors and I don't know how long that's going to last. But you put it in, you can tell, you can just tell.

Especially, I've listened to audio books a lot and there are some audio books I'm listening to going. This is the worst AI voice I've ever heard. They get They pronounce words wrong. They put the wrong intonation into sentences.

It's just, but also, as a lot of you will say, hey, it puts humans out of work that vo. If you choose a AI vo, it's going to put a human out of work. I don't know how to address this other than to say we have faster compilers now, faster um art, faster and better 3D art programs, which mean one programmer and one artist could. Do the work of in the past what was done by three or four. So that's improved.

I'm not even talking AI there. I'm just talking about better, easier to use, faster tools. I put AI in that category, but I understand it puts people out of work. But let me tell you this: my preference is, and always has been, not to have vo in my game.

Why? For all the reasons I just mentioned. So don't be surprised when you hear me say I prefer not to have vo in my games. It puts too much of a damper on some of my design ideas, especially reactivity. But because everything I said in this video has got a but.

But a lot of players like vo in their games. The same players who don't want to read a wall of text will listen to a, vo that's 30 seconds long. Also many players, now expect it and won't buy games that aren't voiced. They're like: why is this game so silent? They just don't like it, but also bear in mind: not having any vo still puts those human vo actors out of work. What's the solution? I don't know, but what I just wanted to throw out there is what I started this whole video with is, sometimes I hate vo and that's why.
