+++
title = "Crunch, Part 2"
date = "2024-04-16"
id = "eXJkecLBhOE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Crunch"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me Tim. I want to talk about crunch again, so consider this crunch part two."
references = ["QJHpuJxMqiA", "nWvwcH2IROo"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me Tim. I want to talk about crunch again, so consider this crunch part two.

I've already done a crunch video. Wow, did it generate a lot of commentary. I'll link it below, and I've occasionally go back and look at comments. People are still commenting on it now and it reminded me of a story I wanted to tell which is crunch related. That happened to me in college, now I have a separate video, which I will also link below, where I talk about how school — both engineering school where I went for undergraduate, and my graduate school — um, how those prepared me for a career in game development, and so that video, along with crunch video, are linked below.

This is not that story. This story is very much about my first experience with serious Crunch and I want to talk about it because I want to talk about the context in which took place and kind of the lesson I walked away with on it, um. So this story takes back, takes place in engineering school, my fourth year. It was a software engineering class that all the computer science engineering students had to take. It was required, so to give you an idea, this means it's all fourth year, computer science, engineering school students with you know, three years of classes behind them, tons of prerequisites. You were prepared for this class, you knew it was coming, it was unavoidable and we all had very similar schedules. So just to let you know — I mean it wasn't like somebody was taking a bunch of other classes — that another engineering school was student, wasn't once you?

At the end of your second year, at least when I went there, I think they make it the end of the first year. Now, at the end of the second year, you declare your major, whether it's electrical, mechanical, Aerospace, computer science. You declared your major in engineering school and from then on your classes are pretty well defined. So I want to talk about a software engineering class I took that had a project portion. Now let me give you an overview of the project.

It was not a group project, it was entirely solo. You were told all of this on day one of the class. The professor said it would be 50% of your grade 50% meaning you cannot pass this class. You cannot pass without it. You could get flying colors and everything else. 100% And you would still fail if you didn't do this project. So the project was not optional. It was a very big project. I will describe it in a minute. But it was very big and the he.

The first thing he warned people to do is: do not wait to get started on this. He gave. He even said I'm, he gave he's. Was giving very little homework, very little, and he was true to that. And there was only one other test, the final exam.

So let that SN in for a second. You had two grades for this class. Half was your final, half was the project, and both of them happened at the end of the semester. Yeah, University of Virginia was on semesters, so those were, like, I think, 15 weeks long. So it was a long um class. That was what: almost four months, so 15 weeks.

Now let me tell you what the project was. This project required you to simulate the job cue of a Mainframe computer and what that means is. Requests would come in to your simulation and it's things needing resources. For example, one might be an executable and it says, hey, I need a CPU and I'm going to have to grab this much memory and this is my um estimated run time. Now it, doesn't know how, no, nobody knows how long something's going to run.

That was, that's part of what I'll get to. But it would say: I, I think I need this much time. Or it might come in and say, hey, this is a print job, so you need to grab me a printer and print off these 20 Pages. Different jobs like that would come in, um, and there are lots of jobs that come in on main frame it might be. You need access, you need to save something. So it's like, hey, this, thing is, requesting that it be written out to this hard drive on the machine, or I want something written out to a floppy that's local, all kinds of jobs. Now those jobs can be interrupted either externally or internally. External interruptions is basically whoever submitted.

The job said NOP, stop, I'm quitting this program. I know it's only printed five pages, but stop, I don't want the other 15, whatever there also can be internal interrupt: this can happen if the CPU runs out of memory when it's executing your, executable, or uh, your executable crashed um, or could be the printer runs out of paper. All of these are internal interruptions of a job that then go back and tell whoever CED it I did a portion of it and now it's, and I can't, I can't finish. So notice too that some jobs, um, based on the, on the type, need to be started and completed contiguously, like if you send need the printer, that's 20 Pages once it starts printing. You just want to print out all those 20 Pages because someone's going to have to, a human's going to have to grab those and give. Them out to whoever asked for the print job. If you, instead, if you had five print jobs and you printed page one of each five and then page two of each five and then page three of the four of the five remaining, that's longer than two pages, and then it would be a nightmare to colate that. So usually, print jobs were continue considered to be contiguous.

Well, some jobs, though, like CPU executables, those can and probably will be swapped between, and what that means is you'll be running part of an executable and then it has to give up the CPU for another executable to start running, and there is a cost to do the switch. That is called the context switch, and that's usually um done as a fixed amount of time to put away the job that's currently running and put a new CPU job, a new job, on the. CPU, so that was what you had to do and you had to get this simulation working. And the simulation was to test different scheduling techniques for these jobs. There's a whole bunch of scheduling techniques in software engineering.

Uh, for example, one of them is shortest job first. You basically take whatever job is estimated to be the shortest total duration and you schedule those to run first. Now compare that to shortest REM remaining time first, where you look at each job how long you think it will take, but then you subtract how long it's already taken. So if it's already been swapped out once and there's only like 100 milliseconds remaining, then it gets to go before something else. Even if the other thing has a total run time that's smaller than it, has a smaller amount of time remaining. That's another one.

Some of them are longest. Do your longest. Jobs first, um. Others are, uh, ones that will use the fewest amount of resources. So this executable um takes a little longer but it will use less memory.

So you, schedule it. There's, basically a lot of different ways you can do and the professor, Prof, provided all the scheduling techniques. He wanted you to code and simulate, because what he would do is, you were told, when you submitted your simulation you just gave the executable. He would then run it on input data. That um that simulated a bunch of different jobs being requested and part of his input was telling your simulation what kind of SCH scheduling technique to use. And then you had to Output it in a particular format and then he would compare: did you schedule all the jobs correctly? Did you swap them out correctly? Did they get completed correctly? Were your total?

Times correct? So here's what I did. I started it that week. I literally got started that week. I only worked a few hours a day when I started, often between classes, I had two classes that had a 2-hour break between them and I. I could have gone in the library or could have gone back to the dorm and then come back.

Instead, I just worked on it I would go to the computer lab and spend those two hours in between two classes working on this project. I didn't see anyone there from that class for the first couple weeks and then, um, starting after a couple weeks, uh, this girl that I didn't know, but we nodd at each other and she started showing up there a lot too, and she may have even started week one and we just didn't syn up, but we started seeing each other there, um, especially. In the evening and occasionally on the weekend we'd see each other there, but it was just us. And one day I even asked her. I said: is anyone from the class coming in?

And she goes, I haven't seen them. And she goes: I've been here a few nights where you haven't and I haven't seen anybody. And I said, well, I've been here a few nights when you haven't and I haven't seen anybody else.

So we just kept doing that. Um I then after about 3 or 4 weeks, so about a month in — we started seeing other people from the class come in. And it was like that for the last couple months of the semester. More and more people from the class started showing up until finally the whole class was there for the last few weeks.

Now I finished my simulation. I got all the scheduling stuff working. I've ran as many tests as I could a couple weeks early. So I started. I used that last couple weeks of the semester to study very briskly for my, the final exams, for my other classes, um, and I had my results printed out and I put them all in a notebook and I was done. I heard later, uh, from my other classmate, the woman I saw there sometimes when I was there, that there were a lot of people there, especially the last few weeks. They were working late.

They were fighting over access because there were only so many computer terminals you could use. They were fighting over the printers because they were trying to do code dumps and stuff. They were fighting over printers because people printing long jobs and there were a lot of raised voices and a lot of fights.

So now let me tell you what happened we had. The final exam and that was when, you showed up for the final exam, you turned in your program and the way you did that was you basically gave something to the professor and it gave him permission to run the executable which was in your account. He, when we had the final meeting, which was to talk about the final exam, the professor reported that over half the class turned in a completely non-functional simulator, didn't work at all, didn't even run.

You'd run it, would air out, stop. Most of the remaining half of the class turned in simulators that gave wrong answers. In other words, they ran, they accepted the job, but the results, the scheduling results that they output, were incorrect on, he said, on almost every scheduling algorithm, meaning the underlying simulator just wasn't completed, it wasn't working right. Two of them worked correctly, mine. And the woman I saw start with me early on the class.

Immediately there was an uproar with when they realized that in this class of about 30 students only two were going to get a decent grade. They complained there wasn't enough, that project wasn't possible, that there wasn't enough time given um and the professor pointed out that not only did over half the class get an executable working, there were even some who got it working correctly, proof that there was enough time to get it done. Um, and he also pointed out that half of your grade was this project because of time management. Your sof, the software engineering principles, were part of the final. But big chunk of this project, in addition to getting it right, was time management, like in real life.

Now a lot of those students went and complained to one of the Deans and I know the dean pulled me and that woman in, we came in separately and asked me about it. He said, hey, what was this like? And I, and he said: did the professor warn? I said yeah, the very first day the professor warned us to get started immediately. I started that week. I didn't see a lot of other uh students get started.

He goes. I have access to their accounts and I can see when they got started he goes. I don't know if they knew that, but I can see exactly how much time they spent on it and when they got started and he goes. You're right, A lot of them didn't start early, but he said so.

The professor warned you. I said he warned us it would take a long time. He warned us to get started early. He even said that he wasn't going to give much. Homework, and he did. He barely gave any homework. Most of it was like: I recommend you read this, because you won't understand the lecture next week unless you read this. He gave far less homework than the other classes.

It's because he said I want you to be working on the project and the dean thanked me and I don't know what happened. But a lot of those students did not pass that class and it was in the first semester. So they retook it the second semester and I guarantee you they got started right away.

Now here's what I think of this now, looking back on this event 30 some years later, um, whenever people worked complained about Crunch and how they were given too many tasks to do, I thought of a lot of them that I saw goofing off at work, the people who would spend 2 hours talking about. A movie they saw that weekend, or would take really long lunches or would come in at about the same time as everybody would leave early or reverse. That happened a lot. People would come in late, a little late, but they'd be late every day, and then they'd leave when everyone else left and I'm like there's no way this person is getting eight hours of work done every day. And then they would complain when crunch inevitably happened.

Now, this wasn't everybody, but it wasn't a few people either. It wasn't like an isolated one or two people on a team of maybe 70 or 100 people. It was quite a number of them.

So let me reiterate: this is why I think crunch is bad, but it is not 100% Management's fault, and I find that people who say that either very inexperienced people or they've only worked on very small and dedicated teams that knew what the stakes were — maybe game development in the '90s on smaller teams — or maybe they came from an indie background where these people know, hey, we don't have money coming in, we got to get this done. Um, now, that's not to say it's usually Management's fault. Yes, it is usually Management's fault, do not mishear me, but sometimes it's also the Publisher's fault — and I talked about that in the crunch video — and sometimes it's the people on the team and I hate that. Those are the very people that Will Sher any responsibility.

No, it wasn't mine. I was given too much work to do, I couldn't possibly finish it whatever. And I just think back on that class where I'm like we were all given the exact same assignment, we all had the exact same background, same warnings, had the same amount of time.

Some people just didn't. Bother, so I repeat it: I still think the majority of crunch's fault is management. But if someone says it's all Management's fault, I ask them to prove it, because I have a lot of evidence that that is not true. And I always think back on this — that software engineering class — and go: wow, that was a lot of students who didn't listen to advice and didn't get started early and then thought that crunch would save them in the last few weeks of a semester and it did not. So there's crunch 2 video.
