+++
title = "Game Development As A Family Car Trip"
date = "2025-08-29"
id = "fGvxiGnPFJM"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Development", "Management"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about game development."
references = ["yqk-A-MmrbE", "SrAuoqdl0os", "puYzP1Uax0k", "F7uaMQnMsvI", "sYZCYDRQtSs", "85trmtqR-s8", "N7b7LFXBZ9M", "U4UMW5rVQ-Y", "VWvSaAGt9N8", "IADSh_P05As"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about game development.

As a family car trip, Bear with me on this. I've done a lot of talking about game development over the last couple years. I've talked about teams and all, how to organize them and how to look for good team members. I've talked about game directors and how to be a good one and pitfalls of being a game director. I've talked about design pillars. I've talked about, I've even dived in like intent, like this is people's intent in making a game as opposed to people's interpretation. I've even tried to explain how design choices are, even made at the most fundamental level.

And all those videos are linked below. There's a bunch of them, but that's a lot to take in, especially if you aren't in the game development industry. And a lot of people here have said either they're — they're not in it in the game dev business but they want to get into it, or they're not in it at all.

They just like hearing about it, and as the summer months approached, I started thinking of this analogy. And the more I thought about it, the more I realized this is a really good analogy for game development, because it mimics a lot of the stages. So, instead of game development, think about when you are taking a family vacation in your car somewhere. You've probably done this, if you haven't, you've almost certainly watched movies that involve this. There's a ton of movies that are just: here's a family taking a, car trip, Whether it's, you know, vacate vacation, or whether it's, uh, Little Miss Sunshine or whatever.

You've certainly seen it, and I, I those. A family trip in a car corresponds to a lot of the stages of production of a video game. Um, by the way, there's a video below too, for what the different stages are for video game production, so let's talk about it I think there's four big chunks about a family car trip. There's that part when you first start talking about taking the trip and all the things you do before you actually get in the car. This corresponds to game development, pre-production, so usually one or both parents will decide on the destination. That's kind of what a game director does. It's very high level. You're just saying, you know what.

We're going to go take a family trip to Las Vegas, or we're going to take a family trip to Disneyland, or maybe it's even vagger than that. We're going to go to the beach. We're going to do a beach vacation this summer. Doesn't really necessarily narrow down the beach — which beach — but it's going to be a beach vacation.

I've been in many game development kickoff meetings that are equally vague. And then the route is discussed: Okay, how long are we actually going to spend driving? Because, remember, time on the road is also money on the road. And more time you spend on the road means less time you spend at the destination. So you talk about: okay, we're going to take this road because it's more scenic, or we're going to take this road because it's more direct, or we're going to take this road because it goes through the mountains, which will just be different. You know, we've never done a mountain, We've never driven through the mountains, or we're not going to do the mountains because you know it's, it could have snow there and maybe we should go around it, even though it'll take a little longer.

These are kind of the things you discuss before you ever get in your car, or your parents discussed it, and it's very similar to what you do in pre-production: How are we going to put this together, what engine are we going to use, Who's going to be you know, who we going to get on the team And what are the pros and cons of what we can do? Dep based on all of that, You also talk about what stops you're going to make along the way. Once you pick a road, once you pick a route, you may go "Huh, there's a lot of interesting things along that route that maybe we should stop and see". Now, sometimes, there will be consensus. Everyone in the family, everyone on the dev team, agrees on the stops you should make.

Everybody wants to see the, that big thermometer. Everybody wants to see that, that scenic vista.

Sometimes, though, your parents just have to decide and go. Either there's too many stops being proposed, like we're not going to spend 4 days. To do this two-day drive, or they want to do something like I know you guys are going to like this, even though none of you want to do it.

We're going to go see the Hoover Dam because we're in Las Vegas and it's educational, and we're going to go look at the dam. It also might be — and this is where kids and game developers alike don't like to think about it — but there also has to be a limitation based on budget. So you may decide you're going to take a family trip to Disneyland, but there may not be money for both parks. If you don't go to Disneyland a lot, you may not realize there's Disneyland and then California Adventures and they are separate parks and they have separate costs to enter. Now you can spend more money and get a park hopper pass, which is cheaper than buying a pass for each one, but it's also you've got to use it in one day. So you, have one day to go to both parks And, trust me, you will probably be spreading yourself thin if you try to do both parks in one day. But that's the pros and cons of talking about that and how much money you have and how you want to spend it and how fast you want to go through the park. That all corresponds to what you're doing pre-pro.

What are we going to do? How much money do we have to spend? How much time do we spend in prepo versus how much time do we spend in production. And what are we actually going to do in production?

Very similar, so then you get to the actual development stage, which, in the family vacation, is. You're now in the car and you're driving. You're going, there. I guarantee what happens in game development happens in family vacations — where you're driving along and somebody goes: "Can we stop here instead, maybe someplace you were planning to go is closed. You didn't know that it's the offse, or maybe it's a lot farther off the exit, or maybe that exit was closed, or maybe there's a detour, or maybe you just notice something along the way and you're like, "Hey, the world's largest ball of twine is off the next exit. We should go take a look at that. Maybe you do It's.

That's part of the fun of taking a family trip. If you let, if you keep it under control, if you all you do is zigzag the whole way there, you're going to arrive at your destination without any time to do anything. But there's another thing that happens in both gamedev and family trips: Emergency pit.

Stops, maybe you have car trouble — No one plans on that, No one expects it. But you blow a tire, you blow a transmission. These are things that you can't really predict, even if you had your car getting good maintenance, and you have to deal with on the road. Or maybe you're just dealing with sickness. Maybe someone gets car sick and throws up — Happened in my family a lot. Maybe someone gets really sick and starts running a fever and you know needs serious attention.

You have to spend time on that and that will take time and that will take money, which reduces the budget you have when you actually get to your destination. Keep in mind the kind of. The rule here is: not everything can be planned. I've met people who think everything can be planned in game development. You can't even plan everything on a oneweek family vacation using a car, something you control in like a plane or a boat, because not everything can be planned. But guess what?

Not everything should be planned, maybe seeing that the world's largest thermometer, or stopping to seeing that giant ball of twine, maybe that turns out to be the highlight of your whole trip. It's what you and the kids remember for decades to come: Not Disneyland, but the world's largest ball of twine. You never know, and if you over plan, you will never see that ball of twine.

So let's talk about the really fast, the development time itself, because that's equivalent to when your family finally arrives. You get to Disneyland, You get to the beach, You get to Las Vegas — Sure, there's a ton of excitement. You know because you're there. You get to do all these fun things. You get to, you get to get your vacation done And it took a long time to get there. You know whether it took a day or two, or you stopped and saw more sites, took three or four days, took a long time just to get to your vacation destination.

Some people just want to relax poolside. Look, I'm just going to sit by the pool, soak up some sun. This is my vacation.

Similar in game dev. They're like I'm just going to implement the features that were assigned to me and that's it. But some people are like "Oo, I want to run around, I want to see the sites, I want to do to, I want to do more game ships". Those are the people who like to look at the reviews. Some people are like "I'm done, I don't want to see it anymore". But a lot of people want to look at the reviews, You, that, that end point in.

Your vacation, when you're done, is equivalent to the ship. You've done it, You did the pre-pro You developed here. You got to the vacation site, You ship. That's the ship. Point is when you're actually at your vacation and it's the last day or two. So that brings us to the final phase, which, in the family trip, is: you're headed back, You're all piling back in the car to drive home.

In game development. That's the phase after shipping where you patch: Everybody's tired. You've all been there, You're tired. Some people want to talk about the trip on the way back. Hey, wasn't that fun when we did this. Hey, guess what?

There's a couple more places we could catch that are just off the highway on our way home. And other people are like "No, no more sites, I just want to get home. I want to get home. We start talking about the next vacation in a few weeks". Those are the different people that happened in the patch phase. Some people are like, "Let's dive in and fix everything that people are talking about in reviews" And other people are like, "Can we just put that in the sequel? Can we move on Again? The same constraints for the family, when you're driving back, you have a limited amount of time and a limited amount of money. You usually have to be back in a in a certain amount of time and you know what that time is, and you only have so much money left in your vacation budget because you know what you've already spent on the way here and at your destination.

Same thing in the patch phase. You've got so much money and so much time and then you got to be done At some point. You have to. Put a pin and say that game is done. I envy games that keep doing production. Uh, after it ships, Usually they have a big war chest of money, meaning it's a wealthy family that can keep doing things whenever they want. Or it's a subscription model, so they're getting paid regularly and they're updating the game regularly.

I don't know what that's like, maybe that's a time share condominium I don't even want. I'm stretching the analogy too far, and then what's interesting about this is after the family trip. Some people in the family loved it, some people didn't. Years later very different memories of the same trip. Some people only remember the big ball of twine. Some people only remember your sister who threw up in the back seat.

That's why your parents are always happy. They took photos And it's why I'm glad I took notes because you can actually look back. At what really happened, the events. At least you can look at those events. Maybe you didn't capture — you didn't get a picture of people crying over the horrible dinner you had that one night, or people getting angry in the car that you didn't stop at this one thing, but at least you have photos of the things that actually happened. So I've worked on a lot of games where there was no itinerary formally discussed but everybody kind of wanted to go to the same place. This is Fallout now.

Even though there was all that consensus and we didn't really decide where we're going, there were still some places we argued about: do we really want to go here? Like the timer in the game. I've also worked on games where the itinerary was laid out but people still wanted to go different places, despite what we had discussed where we're going to.

Go. This happened a little bit in Arcanum. I talked about our.

Our original design had all kinds of — uh, cool things in it and one of the major chunks of the game, which was the tech skills, got redesigned into tech schematics. But that was just a little bit. It happened a lot on The Outer Worlds, because on The Outer Worlds, um, we decided ahead of time what we were going to do, but then, as we got the team together, we saw what we could extra, things we could do and things that we couldn't do. And then there were people who were like: I know, we're, you know, 80% of the way into the game, but we need to do A, B and C as well. And I, like I said a lot of times that those decisions come from above you or from the publisher, but occasionally it came from inside the team.

We're like, look, we just can't do this. I know we said we're going to do this, We can't do this.

So it's it happens in games as well. But then I've worked on games where there was absolutely zero itinerary and no one wanted to go to the same places. Nobody could even agree who was going to drive the car. That was wild. You could still end up maybe having a fun vacation. You got to kind of lean back and go with the flow, or you could have the worst vacation in your family's history. Who knows how that's going to turn out. It's — it's not even well-controlled chaos. There's one more. People ask me about solo development all the time. I've never done a solo vacation which would be the equivalent of solo development.

Then the advantages, of course, is you can go wherever you want. You can stop wherever you want and you can change up things as you go along. For some people, that is the most awesome form of vacation/game development you could ever do. For other people, it's kind of lonely not to share an experience like that with other people. Also, there may be some things you can't do by yourself. You're not going to be doing that tandem bike ride through the streets of Paris by yourself. I know this isn't a perfect analogy, but there's a lot of people watch this channel who said they may never do development And I thought, okay, this, gives you a little taste of what it's like And also, if you've already done development, maybe this will make you think of the whole process a little bit differently. Anyway, I hope you like that.
