+++
title = "Fences"
date = "2026-02-25"
id = "fIj8az5HPds"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Industry"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fences."
references = ["YG4i-F67YOk"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fences.

It's going to be interesting what I'm talking about because it came out of a comment on another video. That video was the spaghetti code video. I'll link it below — where I talked about how code can become really not well structured because of frequent changes in the game. A commenter, Derek Posh, and I — he didn't have a question, We were just talking back and forth about how that happens And I happened to mention that being both a designer and a programmer on the same game still led to spaghetti code, which means even eliminating any communication issues, because obviously programmer Tim knew what designer Tim wanted — still led to spaghetti code. And I talked about how that can happen because design changes And it led me to say that the most eyeopening experiences I've had in this industry have come from me being on both sides of a fence. So when I'm talking about fences, I'm not talking about fence sitting, I'm not talking about sitting on a fence and not deciding which one you want to come down on. I'm talking about actually being on both sides of a fence and understanding the issues on both sides and then trying to explain it to people who are firmly planted on one side.

Uh, the one we talked about in particular was programmer and designer. I've done both of those roles throughout my career — Sometimes programmer, just programmer, sometimes just designer. Very frequently both I've worked on designs and then implemented those designs in the in the game. The designer part of me understood that specifications change, That you don't simply sit down, write the perfect spec, design spec for a game and then people create it. Yet I've worked with programmers that want to code something once and get angry if they have to go back and change it when the spec changed. And I've tried to explain it.

To them in their own language — I'm like: "Hey, you've written code and then later on we found a bug in it and you wanted time to fix it. Why can't the designer find a problem in their spec and fix it? And at that point it's like they struggle. They, that fun is something that can't be calculated ahead of time, that maybe you put something in the game that needs to be balanced or redone because it's not fun. And they're like: well, they should have thought of that. And I'm like: hey, I got a bunch of non-programmers telling me you should have thought more clearly when you wrote your code. So unless you stop writing bugs today, maybe you should cut the designer some slack. And they understood about that, about debugging code, but they just couldn't seem to jump over to the other side of the fence and go.

"Oh, I could see how I write, might write a design document that contains logical bugs and how the features interact". I finally got one programmer to accept it because I said: "Do you remember when that software we depend on our game sits on it had a point release and you asked for like a month to update to it, even though it would give us no new features. Nothing they added was anything we were going to use, but you wanted to update to it". And I had to go explain to the designers that you weren't going to be available for a month and they weren't going to get anything out of it, except maybe the offer of later you might be able to add something new that they might not even want and that would take time later too, like you're not going to get it for free If you. Can accept that it makes sense to update software to a point release like that, I can't believe you don't understand why a design doc would change to make the game more fun and require you to do some work.

So I've had those discussions on both sides. There's also been another fence I've sat on, which is leading a team and being on a team I've led a team in multiple capacities: producer, project leader, game director. Sometimes they were the same thing, They were just called something different because they were had different names throughout the decades I've been in the industry, like I there was a new one that sprang on me a few years ago. Somebody said they were a commercial director and I'm like, "Oh, a TV director". He goes, "No, I'm a game commercial director" And I'm like: "I have no idea what that is" And he explained it to. Me, and I'm like, "Okay, now I understand what it is, but okay".

Anyway, the leader of a team is usually the one with the vision. They know what the vision is of the game.

And I've had to explain this. I've had to have team meetings where I explain it. I've had to reiterate it in strike team meetings. I've had one-on — ones where I'm like: "Do you remember this pillar of the game". That led directly to this feature I'm asking you to code.

That's why it's written that way. That's why I don't want to change it to what you suggested, because your suggestion doesn't support a pillar of the game. Do you disagree with the pillars? Or do you disagree that my feature doesn't support those pillars.

Similarly, though, I've been on a team where I've had to go to the leader and go. I don't understand this feature. It.

Doesn't seem to jive with your vision. And then they've either tried to explain to me the vision or explain to me why it connects. And if I still don't understand — and I pointed out like well, this feature is going to lead someone to want to do this, and the our pillar is them doing this. I actually worked with someone once who thought that I didn't understand what they said. So they repeated themselves word for word, even though I had just said: "Okay, I understand that, but this". So I've been on both sides of that too >> [snorts] >>.

The employer, employee, employer fence — That's one people rarely cross, and I've crossed it. I've been the employed person, I've been the person doing the employee. And I'm just talking about a manager here. I'm not talking about leader team, I'm talking about — I ran a company for seven years — Ticket games, I've worked with people who say managers suck and they can't do their job. I've worked with managers who say employees are lazy and won't do their job.

In general, both of those people are wrong. However, both of them had specifics that they were right about. I've worked with managers who really couldn't do their job. Either they hadn't been trained or they didn't know what their job was, or they just didn't want to do it. And I've worked with employees that do the same. They don't do their job. They have a million excuses why It's never their fault. And both of those people are frustrating. And I've heard people go "Yeah, but the manager can do more damage". Yeah, in theory, yeah, but I've worked with some employeees that have done massive amount of damage just because they're just either a popular employee or the way they spend. Everything about that not being their fault, makes other people go, "Yeah, it's not my fault either" And it just everything rots [snorts]. But.

Interestingly, there's a similar fence gamer and game developer. And I'm easily in both of those all the time. I'm gaming, all the time playing other people's games. I also love developing games. I even make my own games, my toy games. And I've heard both sides there.

I've heard people go: "Devs are stupid and lazy. Gamers think developers are just stupid and lazy And that explains everything that's wrong with these games". And then I've heard — I've worked with developers — and I'm not naming names here, but I've talked with developers that go: "My god, all these gamers are just whiny babies and they don't even know what they want. They say they hate something and then they praise a game for the thing they said. They hated" And when you call them on it like, "Well, they did it right" And you're like, "So you don't hate that feature, You hated how it was implemented".

Well, yeah, you should have figured that out. What am I? A game developer, so I've worked with just it's. I've worked with both sides being unhelpful. That's what I wanted to talk about.

Once you go on both sides of a fence like that, you realize that both sides — sides, - are being unhelpful. They don't think they are, although I think some of them do. I think some people love being that disruptive element, Of course, when they don't get something they want.

Finally, um, they've spent years gumming up the bandwidth of communication across that fence And then, the one time they really do need to get some communication across the fence, it's all gummed up by their own garbage And then they get upset. They're like, "Developers aren't listening to me". Yeah, they pretty much stopped listening after the thousandth person said they were a stupid, lazy idiot and sent them death threats. So now they're not listening, and now you're complaining that they're not listening. Similarly, you know, people are like "Hey, these developers are horrible. And they've, we've, literally said "Please, no more of this" And they throw more of them out and we're like: "What more do you want to hear from us".

And I see people that's more than just games. I see that on TV shows and movies and everything like that too. The problem is, I think, on both sides — having been on both sides — individuals in their camp would rather feel better in the moment, and dispue out anger and frustration and whatever, than actually try to improve things and feel better in the long. Run. Both sides do this And. Being on both sides really has helped me see how many people make one-sided arguments. Basically, they when you don't understand the other side at all. You say things that are just so.

I've said this before in other videos. Sometimes people say things that are so wrong they can't even be addressed. You don't even know where to begin. It shows a fundamental misunderstanding of everything And it's just like I don't, I don't understand it. You know, like if you're talking to somebody who thinks the sun revolves around the earth, so why can't I throw a rock up and have it fall into the sun? And you're like "Oh, there's so many things wrong with that, I don't even know where to start". I often tell people you should try to understand the other side, You don't have to agree. And your understanding is not excusing them. You just want to understand why do they think these things, so I can figure out what the problem is that they're perceiving. If you don't understand what they're talking about, you don't know what the problem is they're perceiving.

And the absolute best way to understand that side is to go over and be on that side. If you want to understand why programmers are telling you something, learn to code and try coding the thing that you're complaining about. Programmers, if you think design is so easy or should be a oneshot, design it now in a fixed amount of time. Because producers said: "Hey, I thought you were gonna have all your great ideas in six weeks. Why are you coming up with a great idea 3 months into the game? Producer, programmer, whatever, why don't you try making a design doc"? By the way, I've thrown that challenge out and gotten some of the most hideous design docs I've ever seen.

Just awful, Just I don't know where to begin. But that is the best way to understand both sides is actually try to do the other side. Some people who have tried to do the other work have come back to me and go: "Yeah, that's harder than I thought". If you can't do that — or I should probably say if you won't do that, most of you could try — you won't. I've tried to do art. I tried to put a mouse cursor in one of my games and the art director threw it out. He said it was terrible. He found it the next day. I thought it was pretty good.

Anyway, the second best thing you can do if you're not willing or able to actually work on the other side is to talk to the people on the other side and believe what you're hearing. They believe what they're saying. You should believe what you're hearing, Although I should say, talk to a lot of them to try to get a consensus, because remember that some of them don't understand your side and what they're saying is less about their side and more about they're complaining about what they perceive on your side menu. You're trying to figure out what their issues are, not what their perceived issues with you are. And that's their problem.

That would really help — And, by the way, this is true for lots of things that are that aren't in the game industry in particular. I know that.

Um, when people want to look for jobs at other places, every company I've ever worked at, including my own company — people have come to me and said, "Hey, I'm thinking about going to get a job somewhere else" and they want to talk to me about it. And they're saying: "I'm thinking about leaving and here's why and here's this: I found this other place and it looks like it'd be good". Every time I've told them the same thing, which is: talk to people who work at that company. Not don't wait for the job interview and talk to ask questions of those people — Although you should — but find, try to find people who already work there and ask them questions.

Because I agree that maybe you don't fit here, but you might fit there worse. Maybe things that you like here aren't there and you're going to miss them, or maybe some of the things that you hate here are also there, and in abundance. So you're not going to escape these things by going there. And I always tell them: find out before you. Go, and you've heard that phrase: the grass isn't greener on the other side. Sometimes the grass isn't browner either, It's just different grass And maybe you don't like that grass as much.

You should still go, look. I'm not saying don't look, because I'm always telling people: try to understand things, but also recognize when you don't understand, because you're not going to be able to understand everything. But if you aren't willing to try to understand, why should the people on the other side of the fence be doing that?

And that's where a lot of the issues come up. In fact, I think I just explained a lot of problem that we have in today's society, but anyway, I see that this is a lot of source of issues: isues in the game, industry, inside of companies, external to companies, company to company, companies to customers. There's just so much misunderstanding. That what little bandwidth exists going across those fences are just gummed up with stuff that's just not helpful and won't lead to better games for anybody, which is all really anyone is trying to do. But anyway, that's my thought on fences.
