+++
title = "Game Lore"
date = "2023-12-21"
id = "fwiXTYMCc6A"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design", "Lore", "Worldbuilding"]
summary = "I talk about how to deliver game lore to the player, and more importantly, how to make the players want to know more game lore."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about game lore.

I want to answer a question from armored spaz, who asks: how do you keep players informed about the game world, and how could you, how could the game be designed to make the player want to find out more about the game? I think this is a really good question. I almost didn't answer it though, because it kind of moves into the narrative design territory that I have said in the past, I'm not that good at. But I think I'm good at thinking about narrative design. I'm just not good at implementing narrative design, so let's talk about that also.

I want to break this question up into two questions, which is: how can you keep them informed, and then how can you make them want to become more informed? So I think that falls naturally out of talking about what the sources of game lore are. There's ones that the game drives, that the game forces on you, and then there's ones that the player drives, that the player wants to know more and starts digging down. So I'll talk about game driven, then player driven, and finally how to make the player want to look for lore. So the game driven sources are anything where the game provides you — you with Game World lore and information that you didn't ask for. Probably the biggest thing about that is just the game World itself. You see things in the world that basically tell you: this is how the world is, maybe fortified Villages and lots of guards, um, and you're like H this a dangerous world. Then there's NPC barks, which is things that NPCs say without going into dialogue, just when you walk by near them, and a bark is a really important source of lore because you may be walking around that heavily fortified Village and a guard may go.

Hope those Bandits don't attack again. Today without doing any lifting. You now know that this is a dangerous world and there's a lot of Bandits out there and maybe the other another nearby guard goes. Well, I'd rather have Bandits than dragons. Okay, you just learned a lot about this world and you didn't do anything. Also, whenever you start a conversation with an NPC — whether it's to you know at a vendor or you're turning in a quest — how NPC start conversations can be an important source of lore. You might go up to a vendor and go, you know, click on them and they're like: welcome to my shop. I hope I have what you need.

Bandits have been stealing. Bandits have been attacking my Caravans lately and then you can say: you know, show me your inventory, which brings me into player driven sources. One of the options on that NPC should be: What's going on with? These Caravans?

How can I help? Blah, blah. These are NPC dialogue deep Dives where it's the Player's Choice to talk with the NPC about a particular topic and learn about It's not the game forcing it on you, it's the NPC. It's the player wanting to go.

Hey, I want to know more about this topic and they can go through those dialogues. Now maybe sometimes you need a good social skill to have the NPC talk more about it. Maybe you need to persuade them to talk about it. Or maybe you need to lie and say: hey, I was hired to handle that Caravan problem.

Tell me about it. Give me your Caravan um route time list. Maybe you have to do a quest. Maybe the shopkeeper says: I don't really know you, but if you did something for me I'd trust you. So you do a quest and then you can. Get access to more lore. Another player driven Source would be books in the world or newspapers. We did newspapers in Arcanum.

These are things that the player has to choose to interact with. But if they do, they tend to get a lot of lore um dumped on them at once the newspapers were interesting in that we tempted you to do it because sometimes there were stories about you — but I'll get more into that — about why players would want lore um. And then the other way that there are player driven sources are just exploration. The player chooses to go out into the world and go around.

Maybe you see a lot of ruins and you're like: what happened to these? Maybe you find, you know, dilapidated wagons and overturned chest and dead Caravan people and you're like, hm, this is a dangerous place for Caravans around here, you know. Maybe you find a cave with bandits in it. You're like, oh, these are Bandits that are doing Caravan raids just running around the world can teach the player a lot of lore. But one of the other questions that armored spaz had was how do you make players want to get at that lore?

That's a really good question. I hinted on at one way with the newspapers. Once players looked at the newspaper and saw that there was a story about something they did and they were mentioned. That's a huge ego boost and it probably will make players look at new additions of the newspaper to see if anything else they did get mentioned. Do not overlook the draw of the player's ego.

Um, another way of making players want lore is if the lore is somehow useful Beyond just providing information, for example, if the lore gets the player. Past some hurdle or barrier, like there's somebody who won't talk to them or there's a quest that they don't know where the location of the ruins are they're supposed to go to. But if they study lore they can find that location or they get that person to talk to them. That's a reason players would want lore. If lore ever leads to new locations, like you're not even doing a quest, but every time you look at a book, occasionally it opens up you a new location on your map and puts a marker there and go: oh, I just read that there's a sunken city off the shore of this part of the. You know, if you go to this beach and go into the waves, there's a sunken city out there. Or I just found out there's an island offshore, or I just found out there's a whole Cave System below this. Mountain player, once players learn that lore leads to locate new locations, they're do it. Another thing is if reading a book or another bit of lore somehow gives you a skill or perk bonus.

Um, sometimes those are permanent, sometimes they're temporary. These are things that once people discover that they're going to read every lore drop you create because they might get that that bonus. Lore can also be a great way of being part of the crafting system. That recipes for things are buried in lore books and not just don't even think of it as recipes for like food or making armor. Maybe magic items have to be researched before you can make it. You can't just make a wand of fireballs. You have to learn lore craft. You have to go read old tones about how people make, made um, wands of fireballs in the past, which leads me. To another great thing you can do with lore, which is maybe some spells have prerequisite of. You need to know lore to cast a spell now for a fireball, that kind of hard to justify. But what if there was a summoning spell? When you get that spell, it just summons generic, let's say it summons a generic demon. However, you learn that if you deep dived into demon lore, you could learn the names of demons and suddenly that spell will summon you a named demon.

That's way more powerful. Suddenly you have — I bet you will have — lots of wizard players who are interested in lore. And then lastly, um, I think a really cool thing to do with lore is that it adds functionality to existing items. This is something that I like because, um, they actually supported this in the original ad, and if you read the section on artifacts, and Relics — came with a whole array of minor and major powers, and sometimes the major Powers were locked behind, the player needing to learn how to use this artifact. Maybe there was lore they had to learn, maybe there are people they had to go talk to, maybe there are sacrifices they had to do, but there was something they had to learn about and, possibly from learning about, had to then do in order to unlock the major Powers. This is a really cool thing for items, because it lets a player get one item like a really cool sword and then, over time, while they're playing the game, they unlock abilities of that sword through lore, and I think that's a really cool thing that you could do. Finally, one way — just to be blunt about it with players is lore grants XP, the same way that you know finishing a quest. Or maybe your game gives you XP for killing a monster, or maybe it gives you XP for discovering a new location. Every time you learn a new piece of lore — and maybe it gets recorded into your lore book — you get XP. Suddenly you probably have a lot of players who really don't care about lore, but they're learning it because they want the XP. I think that's a cool way of dangling bait in front of the player to get them to do something they otherwise wouldn't do. And then it turns out to be a good thing in the long run that they know that lore as the player. They suddenly talk.

Tell their friends what a deep game you have, even though they wouldn't have done that deep dive if you hadn't provided XP. Now as a bonus, I'm going to throw in like things you might want to go deep on. This, like, let's say, you really like some of the ideas I've told you and you're making a game and you want it to be super lore, heavy lore dependent.

Well, the first thing you could do is you could make a literacy skill so players are illiterate unless they buy into the literacy skill, which meaning they pick up a book, a map or whatever. They can't read It's not, doesn't they don't, they can't read. Then all the different literacy lore sources you have out there have literacy prxs. Maybe you bought the literacy skill but you find a really complicated tone on demon summoning and it requires a really high literacy skill. Maybe you spend more points in that skill so you can read that to and unlock whatever it's going to give you. What's really cool is if you put that in a game that does everything I said.

Lore could unlock, that it gets you past. That, it gets you quests, it gets you new locations, it gets you skill bonuses, gets you crafting recipes, gets you spell prerequisites, um, adds functionality to artifacts, grants XP. If you do all of that and unlock it with the literacy skill, I bet you're going to have a lot of players playing your game to learn the lore so they can do all those other things. And, as a side benefit, your game will probably be known for having a lot of really deep, interconnected, interesting lore, because you led the player into wanting to know, more about it through game mechanics, anyway, armored spaz. I hope this answers your question. I hope other people found this beneficial.
