+++
title = "Attribute Design"
date = "2023-06-30"
id = "G_2kCbPO2sU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems", "RPG Design"]
summary = "After the previous two videos where I talked about the specific effects of attributes in Fallout and Arcanum, in this video I talk about attribute design in general, including where my current thoughts lie on how they should be used in games."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about attributes in role-playing games in general, because the last couple days

I've talked about specifically the attributes in Fallout and in Arcanum and made me think, wow, you know, not only have my thoughts changed since then there. I've been in so many discussions about attributes, I've seen lots of RPGs that handle our attributes differently. Plus, someone even mentioned in the comments that I was saying how Dex was so overpowered in gerps in a much earlier video where I talked about the gerps apps I made, including a combat one, a combat simulator. But then in Fallout and in Arcanum I did the same thing. And you're right, I'm totally guilty. I'm.

I remember both of those um design sessions that led up to that and in every case it just seemed appropriate that dexterity would be involved in those skills or derived stats. So I've gotten better and I have some ideas on that. But I want to kind of talk too. About this is me spitballing ideas. I don't think I have the absolute design Fiat on how to do attributes, but at the same time just thinking that way made me go.

That's what I really miss about, so long ago at interplay, when we made Fallout. People often say, hey, what was the Special Sauce, what was so amazing about it? And Leonard and I like to talk about the combination of humor and darkness, and I've talked about how we're all going in the same direction — Vision wise and things like that. But one thing I really missed were those brainstorming sessions around the conference table eating pizza, and the reason for that was, for whatever reason, I ended up with a group of people who really like to chew on ideas, that somebody would make a suggestion and we'd talk about it and we'd say, well, this is what would be the result if we do what you said. This would be the results — the good things and the bad things — and then we talk about, well, how could we fix the bad things? Not, hey, you, what's your idea? You better fix it, or it was okay, that's ideal.

Let's run with it for 15 minutes and see where we end up. And I miss that because since then I've run into all kinds of other people who think brainstorming is totally different and it's set up. Either it means come with an idea and don't listen to anyone else, or just say everything's dumb.

In fact, you know what? At one point I do a whole video on how I think brainstorming session should go and the horrors I've seen in some brainstorming sessions. But that's a totally different video.

All I can say is on this one: when you make comments, just try to. Be a good person, um, understand that you aren't 100 right. You don't have the Cornerstone of objectivity. So now let's talk about attributes. I'm going to start with talking about how attributes can be bad. Um, specifically, the arguments I often hear about: oh, this game uses attributes.

One, they're very hard to balance, and that's true, and I will talk about why that's true in a bit. Um, but I also want to say that the other huge criticism is: attributes are often something someone complains about because you have to make that creation and therefore they're fixed, and you have to make that selection before you've ever played the game. Um, and so you have to go like, do I really need this higher strength, not knowing that your favorite weapon is later in the game, has a minimum strength and it might be below. What you've picked, or it might be above what you've picked. So just the fact that character players need to decide on these before they've ever played the game. Even if it's a replayable game, you still face this at your first character.

That's a bad thing, but the other one which I was saying where, hey, there's no matter how you make the attributes in range, if you make attributes, have a really small range — say zero, five or even sometimes zero to ten, but zero to five is a really big, small range — then any in-game bonus you get for an attribute is huge. I mean, if you were had an attribute range, go from zero to five, even a plus one puts you 20 higher. And if there are lots of things to give bonuses, or if bonuses stack like, you can put on an item that gives you plus. One strength and then take a drug that gives you a plus one strength — you just covered 40 of the range. That strength can even be in, however, if you flip it around and say, well, we do a big range like one to 100, then the problem with that is when you spend points on it in character creation. It doesn't feel like you're getting much bang for your buck. The difference between a 17 and an 18 strength when the range is one to 100 is minuscule.

Um, I still remember I was really into EverQuest — in fact, one day I'll do a video — and I know people are getting tired of me going — I'll do a video on this — but I really got into MMOs for a few years and I loved EverQuest. It was one of the first graphical MMOs I played, but it's AC range was zero to a. Thousand and I used to see people in that game argue over who gets the new. You know, cloth drop, that would change their AC from 16 to 17 and I remember thinking: is there really, on a scale of one to a thousand, a big difference between 16 and 17? I don't care, but people would fight over it. So if you have a big range, too small of a range, bonuses are too powerful, too big of a range and spending points of character creation doesn't mean anything. So notice that.

Don't throw out anything you can spend points on. That's true for skill ranges or perks that can stack and all that. But because you have to pick attributes right at the start of the game, where you really don't know what the game is going to feel like and what the game is going to punish you for having too low, or reward you for having really high attributes, feel specifically sensitive to that criticism, so you may go. Well, why'd we even use attributes at all?

Well, I love attributes because they make different classes and different races and different backgrounds feel meaningfully different. So a perfect example of that that stuck with me for almost my whole career is the original a, D or D D version, one for newer kids. There was extra strength you got if you rolled an 18, but only if you were playing a fighter class, fighter, Ranger, palette, and that's when you roll percentile dice. So you had 18 from 1801 to 18, 100 or 1800.. That was really cool and I remember later, when I introduced ad to some people they got really upset about: hey, my magic user has an 18, how come I don't get to roll and I thought it was. Cool because it made Fighters extra special, especially in a game. When you have a game that's classes, the classes all tend to feel a little sansey and I think D fixed that later on with lots of Feats and class abilities that you can choose to buy. But I also think that attributes are really cool.

If any in-game bonuses for them are really rare, like I could see, making them impossible to get. Like there is nothing that adds to your strength. Instead, there are things that add to things that strength does. So if strength gives you a bonus carry weight and a bonus damage, then there are things in the game that can increase your carry weight and there are things in the game that can increase your bonus damage, but there's nothing that gives you a bonus to strength. I think that's a cool way to treat attributes — attributes, - I've noticed that as gaming has evolved. Another thing I've seen with attributes is attributes used to start in the middle, and if you went below you got penalties and if you went above you got bonuses. And I've seen a lot of games change it so that there's always a bonus associated with it and if you move it down, your Bonus Goes Down And if you move it up, your bonus goes up.

I've even seen people talk about this — other designers — and they say, oh, we replaced the carrot stick model with the little carrot, big carrot bottle. If you're wondering, I first saw this obviously done and discuss that way for World of Warcraft, and I even talked to some of the World of Warcraft developers and they even said specifically: yes, we, did that deliberately, and a lot of people think that's the same. Thing.

What's the difference between having penalties and bonuses versus tiny bonuses and big bonuses? Well, it's a really big distinction if subsequent rules in the game treat bonuses and penalties differently. For example.

Let's say dexterity at the middle is zero and if you reduce it penalizes your AC and if you increase it improves your AC. Then let's say you put in heavy armor and you say heavy armor negates dexterity bonuses. So basically, when you wear heavy armor you can't move around that much. So being able to jump around with high decks isn't going to help you. But if you are clumsy outside of heavy armor, you're still going to be clumsy in heavy armor, so the penalty still apply.

Why I like that was suddenly lowering. If all the attributes work that way, suddenly lowering an attribute is very different in a system that has penalties and bonuses, because those penalties may not be something you can get rid of, where, if it's just: here's a low bonus to a high bonus, you're always getting a bonus and. Who cares if your bonus is a little lower?

Those are things that I see. Those are like the subtle parts of design that some people either don't know about or deliberately ignore when they're making systems, and I think those are really cool things to talk about and they really factor in to how you would make your game. In fact, let me talk now about how I would try to balance attributes when I put them in, because I don't think I've done a really good job of balancing them, as that commenter pointed out. You know my dexterity is not the most balanced of attributes in Fallout or Arcana. One thing I would do: is for all the skills and derived stats that are based on attributes, I would have them be based on multiple attributes, not just one. In this way, if you have something like dexterity that adds in to a lot of attributes, you could have its contribution not be as high. So, for example, disarm traps could be based on perception and dexterity. But because dexterity adds into a lot of things, perception does it — you could have perception add more. So every point of perception may add Five Points to your disarmed traps, where every point of dexterity adds a couple point to your disarm traps, and that way you can drop. Dexterity affect a lot of skills but it's kind of a secondary addition and there's still a, more primary attribute that's factoring in. And you can do that with all of the um derived stats like carry weight or armor class or things like that. You can also try to make attributes self-balancing and I've seen people do rules for that. Like um, I've tried to make it cost more to raise than to lower um.

I've seen games that say you can't have more than one attribute below eight, so people can't just lower a bunch of things and have a couple amazing stats and everything else is horrible and then they just never in the game talk to anybody or they use a lot of companions to carry things so they don't care that their Charisma or their strength is low. I've also tried shapes, you know so, like you have a triangle and you're like, hey, if you do it this way, this, that's really good and these two are only okay. And if you do it like this, these two are pretty good but this one's terrible and the idea of using shapes was just. I don't have to give you a rule saying, hey, you can have one great and two okay, or you can have two good and one bad. Rather than give you that rule, I just here's the shape, spin it anywhere you want, the, rule is built in and we're very visual. So for people who think, oh, I'd rather have numbers, it's like: great, that's great that you want numbers. A lot of people don't want numbers, and that means I don't want to get rid of numbers. I always want the underlying mathematics to be something you can see.

It's just: you're just about to play a game and it's throwing a bunch of numbers at you and you don't even know what they apply to. Um, there was another game. Um, well, people say well, in DND. It was random and that works great. But as somebody who made Temple, I knew people were just gonna re-roll until they got numbers they wanted. So we even put the re-roll button in there. That's just what people do. I mean, most GMS don't go.

Oh, you don't like what you did. Roll again, most GMS. You rolled it and you accept your roles. But now here's an interesting. This is an older game.

It's called Amber diceless, based in Rogers zelazines Amber Universe. What was really cool about this RPG — and it's a tabletop RPG — was the characters were given a hundred points, but rather than spending them on their attributes, they had to bid on attributes in a player-wide auction managed by the DM, and this is why this was brilliant. Let's say, several people want to be strong, and you're, beating, I'm the strongest in the group, and that's how Amber dice this worked. It was like your attribute was either okay or you were the best people. Somebody goes. Hey, I went a bit on strength. I'll bid 20 points. Okay, next two bits, 25., well, if you want it, you're gonna be 26 or 30 or 40 or whatever.

So it goes up and when strength eventually gets sold to the highest bidder, that bidder loses those points to spend. So now, going in the next bid, he doesn't have 100 anymore. He may have 40 points left over, depending on who bit him, and people might try to outbid someone, hoping that they're a bit higher, because what they really want is another attribute and they want people to be lower on points and they can win. Of course, that can fail a few bit higher and everybody goes: I'm out and now you're. Well, I guess I'm the strongest, when I really wanted to be the most graceful, or I wanted to be the smartest. So it adds a whole clever level in there that I've never really seen in any other tabletop RPG. I don't know how to translate that into a single player computer game.

Who, would you bid against? Maybe you could make your companions that way. But because it's always you bidding you, would know whether or not you really wanted that attribute and it just doesn't work. But I'm just saying it was a really clever idea that I saw, and I'm sure there's more clever ideas out there. I just don't see them as much.

So other people think that maybe a way of balancing attributes is just to get rid of them that have a game that doesn't have attributes. I don't disagree with this, but I think in order to do that you better have a very, very good perk trait and flaw system. And the reason I think you need all three is you need perks for things like, hey, I'm gonna make strong character and you buy that perk and then suddenly your carry weights High. Or you may have a trait called big and clumsy and then you get stronger but your dexterity is lower. So that's the balance, or you may have a flaw week and your character's really weak. The perks and flaws could come later in the game and by buying a perk or getting a flaw, that it, that system itself is balanced. When you buy one perk, you're not getting another perk. When you get a flaw, you usually get something else to go along with it, and then the trade is self-balanced. So that is a way you could go with attributes — for my final thoughts on them, because I'm not sure I mean if. I had to pick it right now, I'd probably do it as attributes with a small range that are permanent, and things in the game never adjust your attribute directly. They only can adjust things your attributes affect. So, for example, if there was strength, there might be power armor that instead of giving you bonus to your strength when you wear this power armor, you can carry more. And then there'd be a mod for that power armor, like hydraulic arms, that lets you effectively have a higher strength for determining weapons that have a minimum strength. But then you can do fun things like that mod has weight. So when you add that mod, yeah, you can now use weapons with a higher minimum strength, but the carry bonus you get from the armor — power armor — is lower.

I love that because there's a lot of knobs to turn and you can. Balance things. I am concerned that a lot of games seem to be getting rid of attributes but not adding anything back.

In fact. I'll just say it specifically because I know I've said this publicly elsewhere.

I'm concerned about Fallout 5 directly. Yes, I watch all the fallouts and I see what they do. Fallout three got rid of traits and I'm really like trades, with those wonderful self-balanced things you buy at character creation. And then Fallout 4 got rid of skills. They're just gone, which mainly made Fallout 4 was special plus perks. I'm really concerned, maybe Fallout 5 is just going to be perks, that there won't even be special. I mean, I don't know what's going on there, but there certainly is a trend to eliminate uh uh choice at character creation and I also say I really prefer games now that offer some kind of negative characteristics. I like flaws, I like weaknesses, I like low attributes.

It should be pretty obvious from all the games of mine you've ever played. Whatever you want to call them, whatever type you want to put in. I like that because I think it makes characters much more fun and much more challenging to play and much more memorable. I just there's something about playing a hero that's not perfect that I find fun and I think a lot of other people find fun. So when you lose attributes, or if you have attributes that only have bonuses, I think you lose some of that. So that's what I would probably do: going forward. I hope you like this long-winded attribute monologue.
