+++
title = "Second Toy Post Mortem"
date = "2025-10-03"
id = "GKKEY94Ikb0"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Postmortem"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to give you my second toy postmortem."
references = ["mHMFG8uvOb0", "kVV_2Yy_aXY", "am52Ceuzgh8"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to give you my second toy postmortem.

It's for a little toy I was working on called Dungeons and Dices, which turned out was already the name in use by an existing game and also a burger restaurant in Brazil. So let that be a lesson to you: that you should always do a trademark search before you publish a game. Anyway, this is a game that I started over two years ago. I keep saying: game, it's a toy. What's the difference between a toy and a game? A game you play, a toy you play with. This is a toy that I started over two years ago. I had a video c that I called my insomnia video. I think it was called coding toys — insomnia edition.

You can go look it up. I'll link it below. You can go look it up.

I'm a little rough in It's like 3:00 in the morning when I'm filming it I couldn't sleep. I got up, made a video. But it showed this toy, Dungeons and Dices. And I just want to tell you that, even though that video is two years old, I have literally not touched this toy in over a year. And that's okay.

It's a toy, It's not a game. I didn't intend to publish it, and I'm saying that to encourage those of you who are playing at home to be with different toys, hoping one of them turns into a game. Because you want to be a game developer, It's okay to abandon some of your toys. Not all of your ideas are going to work out. They can be a great idea, They're just not a great game idea.

So I'm going to show you — you know — footage of the game while I talk about it. But just keep in mind it's really just a toy and I haven't touched it in a long time. But I thought I would talk to you guys about this toy and do it as a post-mortem of sorts, because I did a bigger postmortem of my space fighting game which really started to go from transition from toy to game and I worked on it longer. It has lot more going on in both progression and mechanics and rules and you user interface and all of that. I'll link it below so you can see it, because not only can you see the postmortem, but the postmortem for that one links to all of the updates I did along the way. So you can watch this toy start to turn into a game.

That's not what I'm going to show you here. Oh, by the way, I also did a meta postmortem of all my shipped games if you just kind of want to see what postmortems are like for professionally shipped games. But in this case I want to do a postmortem of this toy, because a postmortem is an analysis of what went right and what didn't go right. And this helps you, if you sit and do this analysis when you're done with something — And I think, having not touched Dungeons and Dices for a year, I can say I'm done with it — It gives you an analysis of the game so that when you move on and decide to do something else, you have a very good idea of what worked and what didn't. So it informs what you're going to do next. So let's talk about dungeons and dices.

Let me talk about first about what went right during my development of this little toy. First of all, dice physics. That was why I did it I wanted to model some six-sided dice in all of their physics glory, because I thought that would be fun. In other words, I wanted to get the bounce right: how far, how fast they fall, how much they bounce when they hit the surface, the friction when they hit the surface, the, physics of detecting what side is pointing up, In other words, when the dice stops moving, detecting what face is up. And I did that, by the way, by shooting a vector on the other side down and detecting that that intersected the table's collision box.

And what that? What meant was that there was a vector off each face, an existing vector. I could label that vector, and that vector was labeled with the other side's number. So the vector pointing down on the opposite side of the four was four, The one on the opposite side of one was one. So if the one vector intersected the table when the dice came to a halt, I knew the.

One was facing up, Made it very easy, Loved it. There were some edge cases, so even a very, very simple toy like this immediately started doing edge cases And what happened is sometimes the dice would roll and one would lean against another like this. So it wasn't, there was no face. That was up the vector, because I made the vector really short, because you don't, I don't want it, if it's leaning against a die, to be so far that it intersects the table anyway. So it's a very short little vector coming out the bottom.

So when they leaned like this, they it, they. I knew that their speed was zero but the vector didn't intersect anything. What I did to overcome that was, as soon as the speed hit zero and there was no intersecting vector, I gave it a random force nudge.

What was cool? So so it moved again, and usually rolled off and intersected, came to a stop with an intersecting vector. If it didn't, I gave it another force nudge. What was great about this is you can't see it in the resulting game because when it comes to a stop it I can detect that stop instantly and give it the force nudge. So what you see is boom, You didn't see that it came to a stop because it instantly got that nudge.

So that worked great. The other thing that worked great was the fundamental game idea of kind of mixing yatsi and poker. So there were dice combinations that you were trying to go. So you roll dice and you were trying to map the, face, the face that came up, the number of pips and the color/exture of the dice to what was on the card. This also meant that that whole theme that you were doing a fantasy dungeon fight, that was kind of a good idea because it made it immediately accessible. You knew what was going on. You were rolling dice to fight. You were putting those dice onto a card. If you got the combination — like you got a full house or a straight, then the card went away and you defeated that monster. But meanwhile every time you had to roll to get dice you took a little bit of damage. So it was like a combat: You'd roll to hit and meanwhile you were getting hit by the monster. You could do damage to the monster by putting some dice on the card. Once you got all the dice on the card and that card went away, monster defeated. That was a good basic game design that I had in my toy.

Now let me talk about what didn't go right, because unless you talk about this, you won't be able to move forward in developing your next toy into a game. The first thing I thought was I added classes to the beginning. When you said you wanted to play, you picked a class, like a fighter or a thief or a mage, and they had different abilities. Like the thief's ability was, if you had every, if you had put dice on every um die location on the card except one, you could then do a backstab and wipe out that that card and defeat the creature.

I think that was a mistake and I'll talk more about that when I talk about I think I need better rules. The other thing that became obvious was I needed way better art. Um, I needed to either start looking online for art. I could buy or hire an artist, because the art for this game not super hot. The other thing I I that didn't go right that I could have predicted was making the UI was a pain in the butt for this game. I probably spent five times longer getting the cards working than I did getting the dice working. And this is a game about rolling dice. And the reason the problem was so bad was the dice were 3D objects that I then had to drag into 2D space on a card and the, 3D object, had to go onto the slot and it had to remain a 3D object because you could pull it off the card and move it back.

So doing that was interesting. Um, moving things from 3D space to 2D space is always very interesting in any game. Um, but just the UI in general: getting the cards up there, getting a good texture and border on the cards. Just it seems like everything to do in user interfaces are just an amazing time sync and I hate it. But probably the thing I needed to address the most was I just needed better rules for this game. If this was going to go from a toy to a game, I had to sit down and rethink how you played it.

For example, I thought maybe there should be more than one. Should there should be more than one card representing a creature? Yes, there were cards that were difficult, but I started putting and I did play with this where to defeat, say, a rat, that was one card, but a dragon might be three cards and you have to do all those cards. And I introduced this one card called a defense card, where the defense cards had to be eliminated first. So I started playing around with that. But I'm like I really need to think this through, because what I noticed was a lot of one card monsters were trivial, but once you got to two or three cards they got really hard. And throwing in a defense card or two, I think some of them might not have been possible. I don't think this can be done in the number of rolls your hit points get you At least like the probability of you being able to get that was really small. This made me think that maybe I should have, instead of the classes, that I should have, cards that represent powers, abilities, items and how often they can be used in a particular combat, or maybe they're, you know, used once and tossed. So instead of you having a class that lets you do a particular thing, you can collect what you want to do. And maybe there should be some kind of limitations.

On all of those, like you know, you use it once and throw it away, or you can only use one card per monster or one card per roll or something. There need to be some kind of restrictions on it. Those restrictions need to make sense, but then the other thing I thought was I needed more dice, just having dice with colors, because the colors mattered There were some cards that all the dice had to be the same color and then there were others where the dice all had to be different colors And I thought maybe I should introduce rainbow dice and they match everything. So if you want to put them on something that requires a particular color, they're fit. But they wouldn't fit on something that said every one has to be a different color, because once you put a rain, if you try to put a rainbow die on that it, already matches all the other die colors. So it doesn't fit that, so then I thought, well, I need gray dice.

And they don't. They have no color, so they can't be used on a rainbow card, but they're great to use on plainbow cards, which were cards where everything had to be the same color. Because they don't match a color, so they don't match.

Um then I thought of things like I would love to have metal dice, but I couldn't think of what cool ability a metal dye would be like, if a gold dye showed up or a silver die. What I want? That And It's visually cool, so I wanted it to have some cool thing, some cool power, some cool ability.

Wasn't sure what that was going to be. Maybe you need them to power your abilities cards, I don't know. Couldn't. Really figure it out, so that was probably the biggest problem with this game is I got stuck literally at the mechanic stage. I did not know what a good next step would be, knowing that the art and UI were floating out there waiting for me to improve them as well. So that was my summary for Dungeons and Dices. It was super fun to make and I accomplished my goal of having fun with dice physics, but I needed a much more detailed, and that by that I mean serious, not a toy. I needed a game design to proceed, knowing that beyond that design was a commitment to better art and a better user interface. So that would be my post-mortem for this Dungeons and Dices game. So I hope you liked seeing that done and maybe you can do that for your own toys and games that you make.
