+++
title = "Mentoring"
date = "2024-12-30"
id = "GqStN9u1Yjc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about mentoring."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about mentoring.

Request for me to Mentor someone is probably the most frequent topic of emails and DMs. I get about this Channel and I turn them all down and I will tell you why later. But I totally understand the impulse to ask someone to give you advice, uh, to warn you of some of the pitfalls coming up, and I get it I I mentioned, I've mentioned several times on this channel that I wished IID had a mentor, both professionally and personally. When I was younger I really could have benefited from having someone who was older and wiser and more experienced to just tell me how some things work in life, in business, in game development. It all would have helped me a great deal and, interestingly, I think I was open to it I look back at my early projects and how they would have been better and I, toally, would have been open for someone to give me that advice. But my first project, when I worked at Pegasus software when I was 16 years old, later turned into cybron. I was 16 and everyone else who worked there — there were a few people in their 20s, most people were in their 30s and I think there was even one or two people in their 40s.

None of them had made a game before either. So we were all kind of in the same boat, and it was 1981. It wasn't like there was a lot of experienced people in the industry had been around since. Yes, there had been video games earlier than this, but the industry had been around less than 10 years. Our first game, the game I got hired to make tools for, was games played on a cable set toop box, something I would never do ever again after that, but that I had no experience with — and they were still figuring out and there were some very restrictive rules on how to make art and how to do the code and how the, what kind of inputs you could get from the controller and what kind of lag there was on the controller. Later we moved to making a PC game and I had already been to college by then. I started in high school and then I went off to college and I kept working at this place. It paid for college.

I ended up teaching the lead programmer on that first PC game, fundamental way of programming in c, how to use Link lists, how recursion works, and I still remember on recursion I explained what it was. Then I explained why it was useful. Then, when I saw he was getting too excited about using it, I had to explain why you didn't want to use it. In some circumstances that looked really good for.

Recursion. That was better to use a loop in terms of just memory and the Unseen overhead of calling methods, where you were just you were pushing parameter after parameter on the stack. I had to explain to him what the stack was. So there was a lot of stuff going on there where you would have thought I would have been the one in need of a mentor, but I was often explaining things to people because it was a new industry and I dove into it in when I was like 12 or 13 in terms of learning all this stuff, and so by the time I was 16, I was doing it so fast forward to interplay, where I started in my mid 20s, but by the time I had my own project, which was Fallout, and Fallout shipped, I was already when Fallout shipped. I just turned 32.

By then I'd been the industry more than a decade and a half and by the time I was in my mid mid-30s at troa I'd already been in the industry for two decades. I looked young and innocent and wide-eyed, but I had double, quadruple, sometimes 10 times the experience of some of my peers. There I was with 20 years of experience, working with someone who had entered the industry the year or two before. Sometimes those people were Publishers and I was. It was a strange situation because they knew things I didn't and I knew they did. But it was an odd thing to have someone who's in their 40s, who just started the industry the year before, tell you the way things are and you've been in the industry for 20 years. But guess what? I still wanted a mentor. Even with all that I wanted. A mentor so badly because I realized what I didn't know and I was coming to realize what I wasn't good at, and I didn't have anyone to tell me, hey, it's okay to let go of those things you weren't good at. So I still banged my head against a bunch of things, trying to get better and, just so you know, it wasn't stuff like code and design.

Some of it was. I knew there was code I could be better at and there was design I could be better at. But there was a lot of things like: how do you manage your group of people?

Um, how do you make a good contract? What do you look out for?

How do you network with other people in the industry? These were things I didn't know how to do. No one ever told me how to do it and in fact, some of this stuff was actively discouraged at some of the places I worked at. They didn't want me to know that stuff because I they especially the networking with other industry folks.

They saw as well, people will just leave. And I realized later it's like, yeah, if your company doesn't compare well to other companies, I can see why you wouldn't want people to talk to other companies and find out that it's better over there. They're paying better, the insurance is better, they don't crunch them as much. I can see why you wouldn't want them talking to them.

But that's not the kind of mentoring I was looking for. I just wanted to know, like: what techniques do you guys use? What do you use for Source control? How do you make builds at night? Do you have a dedicated machine? Is it just on the lead programmers machine?

Just stuff like that that no one had ever told me. That we had to stumble into our own techniques, that now you start on a project and there's probably somebody telling you: here's how we do all that, so you don't even have to think about it. Somebody's already telling you how, it's done. Or there are books you can buy YouTube videos to watch of someone telling you how it's done.

The flip side of this, which I just want to touch it briefly: I've worked with many people who do not want advice for different reasons. They think they know better on everything, or they have discovered a way that they think is better, or they're pretty sure they can avoid pitfalls that people have told them about. And guess what? Sometimes they did. Some times their Better Way was better, but sometimes it wasn't, and it's really hard to tell at the beginning of someone. Who wants to do this whether it be good or bad.

What frustrates me is when they do their thing and it turns out to be something bad, and then they blame me. They're like: well, you were my manager, you should have warned me against this. And I'm like I tried and you told me you guaranteed like you should still should have told me not to do this. And I'm like: okay, you're not somebody I want to Mentor because you're just not open to it I think of my own projects, though. There have been a lot of wasted time and money as I experimented on how to do things, but on one of my own projects there was someone who told me: I have a better way than you, and I'm like: I don't think you do. I've done this a lot professionally and academically. I don't think you have a better.

Way, but he convinced me he did and that he would 3 months later, no, wasn't better, time was lost. And because time was lost and money was lost, there were features that didn't go into that game at all and some features that went in a really bad State and shipped in a really bad State.

All because someone argued with me that their way was better than my way and they knew better than me, despite all evidence to the contrary. And I can't help but think that is a person who doesn't wouldn't benefit from mentoring. Because if someone tells me: look, I've got a lot of experience with this, let me show you some things, let me show you some white papers from Academia, don't do this, I can't imagine going. I'm going to do it anyway, but I've run into people like that, and so mentoring isn't for everyone. One thing I've been told by a lot of people when I talk about this in the industry is: hey, some people just have to go through a phase of I know better, and then they will learn from failure, and then they will become better. And I said: I see that, but two things. I always respond with one: learning from your own failure cost time and therefore money, and it's often not your time and it's often not your money.

If you're an indie solo developer, knock yourself out. Learn from failure. I think it's one of the best ways you can learn. But if you're learning from failure on someone else's dime, there's an issue there, especially if they're warning you not to do this and you resist, and then you still waste time and money. Also, I think it's very, very commonly overlooked that you can learn from failure, but it doesn't. Have to be your failure. You can learn from other people's failures. You can read post-mortems.

Uh, they used to have a lot of these in game developer magazine where people would write a postmortem of the project they just finished and you had to read between the lines because a lot of them said things the same things, like we designed more than we should have and we over scoped and we, you know, we misestimated. It's like, yeah, that's like the rubber stamp postmortem. Everybody does that, but you have to look for more things.

Like there was someone on the team who was hyper negative about everything and we didn't get rid of him early enough. Or our manager sent us down some BL blind alleys because his ego got in front of his game Direction. These are all things you have to watch out for. And also, I want to recommend this: don't look at mentors in the light of they're saying, look, I'm right, just shut up and do it. Look at them as: look, I've failed.

I've done things in the area you're doing them in. I have failed. Learn from my failures, if I tell you're driving on a road and there's a pothole ahead, don't just speed up and think, eh, I'm a good driver, maybe you want to switch lanes. There's a pothole in the in the lane you're in.

So this brings me to the last thing I want to say, which is people have asked me to be mentors. I've gotten a lot of those requests. These requests have ranged from: will you please read my design doc to will you play my game, will you read my book and, in one case, will you read my movie script.

And I've turned all of these down by the way, this here is my mentoring. This is a way for me to get the message of how I think game development should go, what kind of mind State you should be in, what your POV should be, or, if you don't want a POV like mine, because I talk about a lot of games for my POV, understand my POV and develop your own, but don't just wander around with a vanilla POV, because then you end up with vanilla games, very Bland games. You know. Figure out what kind of toppings you like on your game and do you like fudge or caramel sauce? You got to figure that out on your own. Sorry, everything's a food reference with me. I'm very, very hungry right now and the best part about this being my mentoring is you don't have to listen to it, there's.

I've seen people I saw on a forum somewhere go. This guy talks a lot and somebody went: why? Why are you listening?

Does he come into your house and punch you and make you watch YouTube? But what I love is some of you are following this a lot, even if you don't agree with everything I say, which is absolutely fine and healthy. But some of the things I say make you go H. I didn't think of that and that's awesome, and I know some of you will follow what I'm saying and that's awesome too. So this is my mentoring. I think it is helping people and it's helping a lot more people than I could, than I could help one-on-one mentoring even more than I could do from teaching a class at a university where I might get 30 students. There's 165,000 of you subscribe to this Channel and that's only about half of my views on any video, so I'm hoping a lot of people are listening to this. You don't have to agree with it all, you don't even have to do it the way I did it, but I hope it helps you in the in the same way that I think a mentor would have helped me four decades ago.
