+++
title = "Working In Another's Game IP"
date = "2024-12-17"
id = "GTQxb8p0BCc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Publishing", "IP"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about working in another's game IP."
references = ["wEIOUsAB-xU", "7OsWuFo2jp4", "U4UMW5rVQ-Y", "HKu5FiMt3UE", "q8T255IglJw"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about working in another's game IP.

This is not me talking about work making a non, taking a non-game IP and turning it into a game. I have a whole video on that. I'm talking about you're making a game in someone else's Game World — maybe it's a, tabletop, and you're converting it to a video game, which is a slight change of medium. Or maybe you're making a sequel in someone else's game world. Or maybe you're working in a game where someone else is doing most of the design work. I want to talk about that because it's an interesting feeling and an interesting process to be involved in something like that. But before I do, I want to tell you guys a story. It wouldn't be a kanong games video, would it, without a story.

I've also never told this story before, ever. So let me caveat it with this to the presenter: I am not making fun of you and I'm going to remove identifying characteristics. I've never told the story because it makes it sound like some people interpret as I'm making fun of the person giving the presentation and I am not. I'm talking about me in this story, how I felt. So without giving too many details, also, I didn't write down a lot of details so I don't remember some things.

Years after troa was closed, I was invited to a meeting. The person who was inviting me was very vague about it. He just said: I think it will interest you greatly and I had time. So I was like, okay, I'm going to go to this meeting. And the meeting was in a conference room that was big enough that having an extra person there wasn't really noticed. The person giving the presentation I don't think he didn't know half the people in the room. He certainly didn't care that there was an extra person sitting on the far side of a big conference room.

I'd say there was probably 10 people there that he was presenting to anyway. So the presentation starts and he's making a game and I honestly cannot remember the genre. It was just all I can tell you. It wasn't an RPG, and he starts talking about a game he wants to make and it's a proposal for the design, and I'm like: oh, I must be here to look at the system mechanics. And he said we're making this game based on an old game called Arcanum laser focus.

This guy had my full, 100%, undivided attention. But let me tell you something: the person who invited me wasn't looking at the presenter, he was looking at me. I was the show, I was the entertainment. I don't get reaction videos on YouTube.

People love watching someone watch something else. I just want to watch the other video. I want to see the source material.

I'm uninterested in watching someone react to someone else, but I get It's super popular. A lot of you love it, well, the guy who invited me I was his reaction video. He spent more time looking at me than the presenter.

The other thing I want to make clear is they were just using the Arcanum setting. It was not an RPG. They didn't, uh weren't, interested in the mechanics, not really as much as you could divorce those from the setting because remember, I always, I always tell people do setting, then story, then system mechanics. So the setting is going to have some system mechanics that support it. So it's kind of hard to tease those apart if you do the setting first.

I did ask one question during his presentation. I said: do you have the license for? It? And he responded: we're currently in negotiations with Activision and we're pretty positive we're going to get the rights. That is a very long way of saying no, they did not have the rights. So this should tell you. This is a time where it had been long enough, after troa collapsed, that Sierra had been sold to jaes had been sold to Activision, so that's who had the rights.

I didn't say anything else, I just listen to him explain Arcanum. Now let me tell you how surreal that was. I sat there listening to some stranger explain arcanum's setting to me for use in a non-rpg game. I wish my notes were more detailed, because I'm just mainly going on feeling here. I remember going some of what he said was right and it was mostly factual things.

Th, this, country did exist and yes, this is. They were having this kind, of issue and yes, there were these kind of different races, and here's how they were kind of portrayed. A lot of what he said wasn't right, but it wasn't factually wrong. It was just his interpretation of what Arcanum was saying was so not what we had intended. That it was sort of bizarre listening to it and it made me understand they were making an RPG and part of his interpretation of Arcanum was the part of it that supported this non-rpg game.

Like I said, I didn't say anything, I just watched. Afterwards, of course, the person invited me — what do you think of that? And I all I tell him is that was really surreal. That's all I really said and I've never told that story to anyone. I've never said an interview like: well, I watched someone explain Arcanum to me. Now this, by the way, that kind of stuff isn't new — um, I've had people explain what Fallout means to me countless times. I have a video called capitalism and a follow-up called intent.

They're linked below where you can see people again and again and again explain to me what Fallout was. Now their interpretation is fine, but when they started to say: and this is the intent, this is what the team's intent was, that's wrong. Similarly, when I was watching this Arcanum presentation, I was getting that a lot of this was his interpretation, but he was portraying it as this was the game's intent. And I was like this is weird. And I've mentioned in another video — and I don't remember which one it was — where I I watched someone explain fallout's visual style to the art director. And as a color blind programmer, let me just repeat, I didn't have a dog in that hunt, but wow, was it fun.

To watch, so I kind of got why the guy invited me there, because he wanted to watch me react to someone explaining Arcanum to me. I've watched Leonard react to someone explaining our fallout's visual style to him. All of this has made me realize how much people see things through their own lens. Everybody has their own POV. I've talked about this a lot.

What's weird, though, to me is I knew that I have my own lens too. It's why I tell you guys all these stories, so you can understand my lens and then interpret what I tell you later Through My Lens. But I've encountered more and more people who require everything to fit their lens, and they will ignore anything that doesn't fit, that's factual, and anything that can be interpreted will get a spirited, almost angry defense of smooshing it into their lens to force it in. Even if it doesn't really fit the, they find a way of forcing it in.

And I know some of you are probably thinking he's talking politics. I'm not, talking politics, but I really am still talking game development. Here. Everybody has their own point of view, and why will they force a square peg into a round hole? Conversely, I've been called wishy-washy more than once. I've been told: just decide, just make a decision. More than once, because when I'm presented with something and asked what I think, I start to give the pros and cons of it. Well, I like this setting because of these reason, but it we have this problem, or I like this system mechanic, but we're going to have to figure out how to fix this now. Let me tell you: this is actually a good thing to have, because the people who try to shove things into their lens ignore the faults and then you end up with a game going out with a problem that could have easily been fixed if you had just acknowledged it.

But I do this on everything. I do this on system mechanics, I do this on storyline, I do this on ux. I talk about the pros and cons and I like getting feedback from people on it. Um, it's interesting getting feedback on how my ideas fit into other people's IPS, like when we were working, when troo was working on the Lord of the Rings game. I loved it when they sent a token expert to talk to us — and there's a video below where I talk about that demo.

He had a breadth of knowledge that was incredible. But even then we found some things that were factually incorrect, not interpretations that were wrong. He said something and I'm like that's not true. And luckily, like Jason Anderson, had just skim read the similon and he said: if you look on this page and we were right, it was a factual thing. But on the interpretation stuff I'm going to bow to the tolken expert.

Similarly, and I've talked about this, when I made Temple of Elemental Evil, I got to talk to Gary GX — I think it was in my brushes with famous people video. I got to talk to him about what he intended in the module because I didn't. I could read all the facts from the module, but I didn't want to read what intent was and there were some places that were vague and so I got to find out intent from the man himself. Um, similarly I, when I worked on Pillars of Eternity, I I worked on that IP. I don't consider it an IP that I was a creator of it was Josh Sawyer. I made classes for that, but I loved getting Josh Sawyer's feedback and they got changed from my initial design because it's his IP. I love that kind of work when I'm working in someone else's IP and I would never tell any of those creators that their ideas were wrong.

The closest I ever got was: hey, this thing you want to do, this idea you want to do, would be very, very hard to implement. With gaks it was the idea of you know, a sword, a special sword and a special class. That doesn't really fit in with all the rules, and with computer you got to have rules. Um, for Josh it was some stuff I wanted I thought should be expressed more about the player character that I think was coming across, but that was just that's. That's completely subjective, similarly — and I've mentioned, mention this: I've gotten postmortem after one of my games have shipped that I did do the design on from people on the team. Uh, somebody gave me a postmortem for temple, who worked on the team. Uh, I got several postmortem because I asked for them, from team members on The Outer Worlds.

They're great. It's great to get that kind of feedback. In fact, it's so obvious to me that you would want that kind of feedback that's why I sent my postmortem for Fallout 3 and four to Bethesda. I just assumed they'd want them.

Never heard back, didn't need to, but you have to remember that the place I was coming from was Fallout was something I had a big hand in creating and they did invite me to E3 to get a preview of Fallout 3 and then afterwards Todd Howard, Pete Hines and EML pagio. I hope I'm saying that right. We all had lunch together and we talked about what I had seen, so I assumed they would be interested. They were interested at that lunch. I assume they'd be interested in the postmortem and my postmortem were okay.

Here's all the things that I thought worked and here's the things that I thought didn't work. But, by the way, I've never going to put those postmortem on here and I know you guys will ask because those postmortem were for them. They weren't for you, they were for them.

Now, I personally like getting other people's interpretation of my games. I love hearing it when I talked about intent, I tried to make that clear. I love hearing what you guys thought my games were about, because that's great, It's one of the reasons I like making my own IP and not working with in someone else is because I know. What the intent is, so I love to hear your interpretation when I'm working in someone else's IP.

First of all I have to interpret, and interpretation is hard. Or, conversely, interpretation is very easy to do but your interpretation may be so personal, so non-universal, that no one else will agree with your interpretation. A good, Universal interpretation is very hard to create. Also, extension is hard.

You know there was only one game with Arcanum. So when I watched that guy G his presentation, I remember thinking there's only one game. One game is a point.

He didn't know what direction we were going to go. He didn't have access to Our Journey to the Center of Arcanum Docks.

But once there's two games you kind of have an idea, but still only an idea. Maybe it's a straight line, maybe the game's going to go that way, maybe it's a parabola. So you got point maybe the third game would have been here and the fourth game would have been here, so the game would have gotten crazier or gone off the rails on one axis, and that was the intent. But you don't know when you only have one game, so I can't blame this guy explaining Arcanum to me based on one game. The other thing that's hard about converting one game into another or making a second or third game is what I call transposition, and I'm stealing this from music where, like, guitar gets transposed to piano.

It's not translation, because there are some things you can't do in one. What I use transposition for is, for example, turning a turn-based game to a real time game is transposition. You have to convert so many other things when DnD, when BioWare made um DnD ad, and in balers Gate 1. And two from a turn-based game to a real time game, they had to change a bunch of rules and in my mind that makes it a little not ad and that's not ad. Andd is turn-based. They made a interpretation of AD and real time on a computer.

Same thing when you go from an isometric game to a first person game, there are things you have to change to make that work. I think those are useful things to do to advance the game, to extend the game, but that kind of transposition is subject to interpretation. Some people like it, some people don't. For though all those reasons, that's why I find working in someone else's Game World to be hard, and if I had my own way, I'd only make new IPS, I wouldn't work in someone else's. Anyway, that's my thoughts on actually making games based on someone else's games.
