+++
title = "Fungible Employees"
date = "2025-10-22"
id = "gVQgXp7gN6s"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Management"]
summary = "Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I'm going to talk about flem."
references = ["F707wIeTX2g", "pAK0dtNT3kc", "3mfl_jOf-Jw"]
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I'm going to talk about flem.

You know what flem is in the back of your throat. Some of you are swallowing it right now. Today I want to do a deep dive into the nature and chemistry of flem. So let's start with: Oh wait, no, no.

Today I want to talk about funible employees: Fungeible. I like that word because it's got the word fun in it And a lot of companies think employees are funible. What do we mean by the word fungeible? And I like it. I'm using it here in a very specific way.

Fungeible means if two things are funible, it means they're identical and can be interchanged with no loss. So a dollar bill is fungeible, if I say, give me a dollar, I'm not talking about a particular dollar bill And I don't care what dollar bill I get, I just want a dollar bill. Gold is that way. Two 24K gold nuggets are worth the same and are considered the same thing — Barrels. Of oil, bushels of wheat, basically anything you find on the commodities market, those things are considered funible. When someone sells a bushel of wheat, nobody cares exactly about the wheat or the individual grains of wheat, It's just bushel of wheat. You can buy and sell bushels of wheat.

Employees are not funible, even two employees of the same type. If you have two programmers and you think you can just swap them. Well, if one's a network programmer and one's a graphics programmer, you're in for a world of pain in what's coming up in your game. Similarly, you would never think of swapping an animator with a concept artist, even though they're both two artists in your art department. And you'd never say "Oh, you know that lead designer, I'm going to replace him with this junior designer who has absolutely no experience yet". You just wouldn't do that, but companies like to act like employees are funible. Now, I think some of them really think they are funible in the sense that it would be easy to replace them. And that's becoming more and more common. As more and more people try to get in the industry and AI is arising, I think a lot of employers are like: you know what?

I could just replace these, It wouldn't matter. I'm going to talk about why it will matter. But I will say that very rarely employers and publishers do think of employees as fungeible in a well-meaning way. And I can think of a couple examples of that, which is, in an attempt to avoid crunch, a lot of producers will try to ameliorate a bottleneck by just putting in more employees of that type. Oh no, there's a lot of bugs, Let's throw some programmers in there.

Oh no, we're not getting these. Creatures done in time, Let's throw a couple more artists in there. The problem is, unless you really determine the nature of that bottleneck, it's, the, thing that's slowing us down with creatures, is the modeling or the rigging or the thing those bugs are all in network code or something.

Unless you know that you just better not throw another employee of that type onto the team, because first of all, they may not be able to help at all. But even if they can, the ramp up time for them being able to be productive may be really high If you pull a car sharp programmer off a Unity game and throw them on to an Unreal game where everything's being done in C++ and just expect them to hit the ground running, even if it's replacing a senior from the Unity game to a senior on the Unreal game. You're going to have some ramp up time.

They're not interchangeable like that, and then I've seen publishers. They love to say — and I know you guys don't like this — When a game comes out and they say from the makers of, it's usually not the exact same team. And so then the game comes out and it feels different and people are upset and it's because, well, maybe 10 people on that team worked on the game. They're saying from the makers of, but the other 100 didn't. So the pubs meant well, because they're like: well, it's, got to be like this. But then everybody gets upset that it's not exactly like that. And that's what I mean by fungibility. Now I do think there's a lot of not so well-meaning fungibility from employers. Fungeibility means an employer can devalue their employee, saying, well, you're easily replaceable. So then they hope the employee. Asks for less compensation or time off or whatever they want them to ask less of. And it does make me wonder sometimes if this is why I've seen more specialists in the industry, because that's kind of a way to combat that If you are a specialist, a well-known specialist, it's kind of a way of telling your employer: you can't replace me easily because this is a specialty.

Good luck finding another, you know, network code specialist. But I want to talk about some more, some non-speist reasons and just some general reasons that employees, employers — should not view employees as fungible. Because if you lose an employee — and that's how I'm going to cast this — If an employee leaves a company, you lose so many things that you may not be thinking of right away. I'm going to break it down into three big things: institutional knowledge, um, asset preservation and just this whole list of ineffable things. Let's start with institutional knowledge.

What I mean by that is: no matter where you work, things are probably done a certain way. Whether it's code, whether it's, you know, skeleton rigging, whether it's adding a sound effect to the game, there's probably a certain way it's done with certain tools, maybe some made inhouse, maybe some thirdparty tools you bought, but they all work a certain way. There are things that you think should work, that don't quite work, and it's expecting things that aren't in any kind of documentation. I can't tell you how many times I was working with someone and I started to do something like "Oh no, That won't work. You got to do this" And I'm like "Why, why can't I use this file? Why can't? Why can't you know this button is labeled this, why doesn't it do that? Oh well, it expects this format, or you have to do this first before that will work" It's. I've seen this happen in so many times. There was um, some software we had years ago that had to be initialized in a certain order. There was certain initialization functions that had to be called, and they had to be called in a certain order, or it things would not work.

Some people knew that, some people didn't. I see this as employees know where the potholes are in the road ahead. You're driving that road, you're still going to be driving that road if that employee isn't in the car. But they know where the potholes are And maybe the company doesn't. And frequently I find that the company doesn't know what it is. They don't know, because I can tell you, the two times I quit a company and left, I got calls from: people working there saying, um, did this work before you left, because it's not working now? Or how did you get this process to work? Or how did you deal with this person? Yeah, I used to call asking about I'm having trouble dealing with this particular person. How did you do that? And I would answer, and I think I think both of those companies vastly underestimated how many problems I helped with after I left, because, boy, did I get phone calls from people going "Uhoh, something's not working anymore.

Can you explain how you had it working". So all of that is what I would lump under institutional knowledge. And when someone quits, a chunk of institutional knowledge goes with them. And if something they knew isn't present in somebody who stayed, you just lost something and you may not know you lost it.

Let's go to the second thing, which is asset. Preservation. Um, I have two videos on this on, asset preservation, and one in general, and then one that I tried to do, uh, asset preservation myself.

What can happen is if people start leaving a company, you can be left with no one from that project left at the company. Maybe it happens a few years later, maybe it happens 10 years later. You're left with a company where no one who works at that company knows anything about what that project was. They don't know where stuff was stored, how it was stored. This is how things get lost or misplaced, or it may have been stored, but they don't realize that. You know what?

CDs don't last forever, maybe every five years you should take that CD, read it onto a hard drive and burn a new one, or take that flash drive and copy it to a new flash drive. They don't do that, so the one that's sitting in a drawer that nobody's thinking about rots. Then they go look at it 20 years later and they don't have anything.

I wish this was hypothetical. This is not hypothetical.

Sometimes, though, they have the, assets, but they don't know anything about it. What software was used? Um, so, even if the data is recoverable, they don't know what to do with it. They're like: how do I, what do I do with this? What? How do I compile this? Were there environment variables that I have to set first Are? Is there a batch file I should be looking for?

Is they don't know what to do with the actual assets that they have preserved, which just makes it worse, because the company should know this. And a lot of these companies have are billion-dollar companies and they should know this, but they don't. And because the actual people who do left, maybe because they were undervalued, maybe they were valued more somewhere else. That stuff is just lost, now, those two things — institutional knowledge and asset preservation — are very specific things, but there's a whole list of things that I put in this grab bag I called ineffable things. These are things that if you lose someone, you will lose something important, but it's really hard to put your finger on it.

The first one is humor. I have a whole video on why how humor is so hard to do. In games. You can lose one person and the entire humor of your game will change. Humor by itself is hard to do. So you usually have a few people, maybe just one person — championing it and making sure it goes in a certain direction. You lose that person. Either you stop having humor or you. Get humor of a different kind, maybe that's okay. But if you aren't doing this as a deliberate, conscious choice, you're basically just rolling the dice and hoping it works out.

There's something similar with style, like the style which game mechanics are being made and how they feel like when you play the game, or just the, music in the game. There's a certain style. Try to replace that person — who's in charge of that style — with someone else and you will get a game that feels very different, Um. This could be extended to what I would just call tone. Games have a certain tone to them.

It's, um, how NPCs act, how they talk, what kind of quests are available and what is it, what kind of unique items are available and what aren't. This is kind of the tone of the game. It's, is it, is it. Um academic? Is it funny? Is it um dark?

It's not really humor, It's not really style. It's kind of like the tone, It's the vibe of the game. This will change entirely if you lose someone, or enough people, because all these things I just mentioned, they're hard to define. These are things that are hard to find. That's why I call them ineffable. You feel them when you play them, but you'll be hardressed to go.

What exactly changed? I mean, this is a sequel to this game I loved.

Why doesn't it feel right? Is it because it's in a different part? It's set in a different part of the world?

Is it because the NPCs are different? It's because they had different creatures? It's because they added new abilities? Because they overemphasize They emphasize combat more, or is it because they emphasize dialogue more?

It's hard to put your finger. On it, so I put all those in a bucket called ineffable things. And every single employee that you lose and replace with another one, those ineffable things shift. And when, they shift too far, your game may be bug free and have a — you know, 120 frames per second, but it will feel different than you intended it to. So what's my point in all this? All of this knowhow I talked about, from the institutional knowledge to the asset preservation, to all the ineffable things in putting a game together — All this knowhow comes from the people who are making the game.

They're not things that are in the design doc. They're not things that can be expressed in a handful of design pillars. They're not on the company's — you know — web page of company values, of things they value. These are coming from the people who are actually there. And my point: is: change the people, change the nature of those things, change the game, because people fundamentally are not fungeible, No matter how much some people hope they are.
