+++
title = "Code Comments"
date = "2026-01-28"
id = "GYp00o-sewY"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Programming"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about code comments."
references = ["azJDI3Wvx9g"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about code comments.

I made a video about a month ago where I called commenting on comments, which was about me talking about the comments left on this channel. But several people left comments on that commenting about comments video, thinking that I was going to be talking about commenting source code. And I thought, well, that's a good idea. I've never done that.

Let's talk about how to comment your source code, Which, by the way, there is no correct way. If anyone tells you there's a correct way to comment source code, they're probably a lead programmer or a programming director who's been in that position for a long time and has just gone crazy with power. But I do think that in general, there's some good things you can do with comments, but it will require your best judgment. I don't believe you can make a hard and fast rule that can never be broken.

So in general, let me talk about a couple in. General ways of doing comments and then I'll talk about some specific things that come up in my own code that I comment a certain way. So, in general, do not under comment your code. If you do something complicated, you should probably leave a comment next to it. If it's, if it's a really obscure algorithm or you're doing some cutsey little trick where you're going to mask out some bits or poke a memory location or do something, leave a comment. You can think of it as leaving a comment for someone else, so they'll come back later and they'll understand your code, but you might want to leave that comment for yourself 6 months from now. I cannot tell you how many times I've seen a programmer come back to their own code 6 months later and go "Huh, I don't know what I'm doing here". I mean, I've lost track, of that and I saw that at every company for decades. I've seen juniors do it, I've seen seniors do it. You come back to something that was obvious when you coded it and you have no idea. It's a little less common in seniors, because they get, they get, they catch on to the fact that how their brain is working and they're like "Ooh, I'm going to leave a comment here because I'm not going to remember this clever thing 6 months from now". But I've seen it from everyone, similarly, do not over comment. I can't stand it when I open up a piece of source code and there's a novel that I have to read through to get to the three lines of code. As a rule of thumb, if your comments are longer than the code you've written, you probably have some you're doing over commenting.

I've seen people. Leave a comment dividing by two. They don't say why they're dividing by two. I've seen it next to a bit shift right and I've seen it next to a {slash} equal two. I don't know why that's there. Both of those are painfully obvious that I'm dividing by two.

But there we go. That's an over comment, so now that we've established don't under comment, don't over comment, let me tell, you about the types of comments I tend to do in all my code. The first one is a big chunky comment that you see either at the top of the source code file or maybe in its header. It basically says what this thing is, who wrote it and the date.

The reason for this is sometimes it's not obvious from the module name what it does. So the topic might be: "Hey, this is file IO for re-reading. And writing, uh, file data into our own packed data files". So you're like, "Oh, that's why they have wrappers around F write and F read. They have their, They read and write into their own packed files". You obviously want to document who made it, because if someone comes back later and makes changes they should put a document in there. They say "Hey, I know, so-and-so made this in January, but I came back in March and made extensive changes to F seek and F close. You know, commented below, so if you go to F seek and F close, you may see comments by that new programmer going "Oh, we found a bug here" or "Oh, we had to extend this to work with something else". So, top of file, that's the one time I'll have a big chunky multi-line comment In general. When I code a new method I will. Write in very abbreviated English what I'm doing — I pseudo code. For example, if I have something that if I'm loading a save game, my pseudo code may be: uh, open the save game file, call all of the registered functions — because all the sub functions have registered that they want to read their save game data — Call all the registered save game functions, close file. And then there may be next to that, calling all the registered ones. I may put something important in there, like: the ordering here is very important.

You cannot reorder the, You cannot reorder these um save reading functions and expect it to work on a previously written out save file. If ordering is important, you can write that or just not put anything. But if the ordering's super important, you may want to leave a comment. You also may want to leave a comment going "Any future programmer. This is the loop if you want to make a load bar for save games".

I call these pseudo code comments. Usually it's a very simple, English comments and then as I fill in the code, as I write the actual code, the pseudo code I leave around. I just put a {slash}{slash} in front of it and leave that next to all the code that's actually written. So now when you open up load save game, the pseudo code is still there and you can see all the steps I took to load a save game. Another thing that that helps with is if you're writing a method and just the pseudo code is really long, I like to have a method fit on the screen, Which is — Yes, it's very subjective, because what, how big is your screen? It's my screen. I like to have my code fit on my screen.

If it's too long, that's when I decide to break into sub methods. If it's too long in pseudo code, I will definitely break it up into sub methods. But if, when I'm coding it, becomes pretty lengthy, I break it up into sub methods too Basically, you know it'll be like open the file. Now call the reader, and that there will be another method that will loop through all the registered readers and then close the file.

That, That, That's something that we're like when I'm making comments. I realize the code is getting complicated enough. I think I better break it into sub code. And then, speaking of complicated code, whenever I write something that I know is tricky or I know is obtuse, I leave a comment. This is true whether that, like the code itself is very complicated, like it's doing a very delicate thing, like it's.

Calling some things in a particular order and combining them with bit masks and bit or operators, and then you're writing it out to something else and you have — and the place you write it is very specific for the piece of hardware you're working on — comment that, Comment that stuff. I find it, if I have too many of those kind of comments that something is very complicated, that's a sign that I either need to rewrite it or break it up into additional methods. The rewriting is for things, if I do stuff that's very hardware specific, I like to push that stuff out to a library of hardware specific code. So if later on — and this has happened to me — someone goes "Hey, your game, You know you made it for DOS, let's make it for Windows" or "Let's make it for Mac" or let's make it: "Hey, I know we. Said we were only going to do that game for PC, but guess what? We're doing it for Xbox and PlayStation as well".

All those things have happened to me. By pushing hardware specific code into its own libraries, it makes that stuff easier to do. So that way, when you're doing all this stuff and then I go, "Okay, this needs to be written out to this particular location", if that stuff is very hardware specific, all that should have been in a function and you should have just said: maybe, like Xbox, you know blit and you put it out and that goes off to your special Xbox series of libraries, your Xbox set of library methods and you're blitting there. If you don't even know what blitting is, don't worry about It's something specific, A? Um, another example of that is if I'm writing a, method, and I'm using a very specific algorithm that I just learned to write that piece of code and I didn't know it before, I will comment the bejesus out of that section of code because I know my brain. If I had to learn this right, just for now, that's a good indication that I never needed it in the decades before. I probably won't need it decades from now.

I'm going to comment it so I remember what it is: >> [snorts] >>. So that's, what I do with real tricky or obtuse code. And then finally — and I know I've mentioned this before, but I'll bring it up because this has been so successful for me in my career — it's my {slash} ZZZ comment. I call this my interrupted comment. It's, if any time I step away from my code for any reason, whether it's the end of the day and I'm exhausted. Whether a phone call came in, someone walked into my office and just started talking without asking if this was a good time or a meeting. There's a meeting and I'm like "Oh, oh, I'm late".

I go, I go {forward}{forward}{slash} ZZZ and walk away and save and walk away. I leave that comment in when I come back and keep coding My ZZZ is my interrupted comment. It meant I walked away from the code here.

Let me explain why. I cannot tell you how many times a week later, a month later, a year later, I've had a bug in my code, only to discover that was it was in a line or two, maybe three, most of a {slash} zzz comment Meaning because I got interrupted and I lost my train of thought. For whatever reason, when I came back I didn't quite start up right. I was off on. My iterator or I forgot that I had to call something to sort that thing before I did this Something. But I can't tell you how many times getting interrupted has introduced a bug into my code and I only knew it because of those zzz comments. I do zzz all the time, even on my toys, that I make it here at home When I'm done for the day, or I decide it's time for lunch, {slash}, zzz and I walk away.

Anyway, those are my general rules and some more specific rules for how I comment source code. So do you guys have any comments? See what I did there.
