+++
title = "Arcanum Dialogs"
date = "2023-11-01"
id = "GYWEgQAh6So"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Dialogue"]
summary = "I talk about how the dialog files worked in Arcanum. You might want to review these two videos before watching this one:"
references = ["5l7YcGCQ5Ck", "coPkWyJIl-M"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I'm going to walk you through an Arcanum dialogue file explains how everything works and, along the way, kind of explain why we did it this way.

So I'm going to put the file up, boom. So this is a the actual example NPC dialog file that I made back when we were making Arcanum, to show people who would want to make dialogues for the game, kind of how it worked. So let me walk through how this works.

Um, the ooh, I think they're blue. They look light gray to me, but I'm pretty sure I made them blue.

The blue lines are NPC lines and all the lines between NPC lines are PC responses. Let me tell you how those are broken down, because these are very um, it's very easy to write these, but each column means something, different. So column B is the number of the dialogue line. So if you say you know, hey, I'm having an error thrown on dialogue line three, it's what's in.

Column B, it's not the row, and this is important because later I'll explain how we ended up processing these Excel spreadsheets into plain text files. By the way, yeah, if I didn't make that clear, we wrote all of our Arcanum dialogues in Excel. We didn't have time to make a tool, so we used Excel and then later on we export them as dialog files. So column D was called the text line, the text, column um and column F was called the G field. Now, in an NPC line, uh, those often look the same because what that was is the text field was the NPC response if the player character was male and the g field was the NPC response if the player character was female, because many languages require those lines to be translated differently, even though in English 90% of the time, look, they look the same, true, the dialogue. Writer could say: how are you today, sir, and how are you today, ma'am? On the different lines frequently they didn't, often they were just the same line: how are you today?

So we had to include that for the localization reasons. Then the H column was the M, the IQ field. Um, it was the, if it was a number, it was the minimum IQ that the player needed. Or the um yeah, the player needed to say that line. I don't believe it was used in yes, it was not used for NPCs.

They could automatically say their line, now, if the I field is negative, that means it's a maximum IQ. The player character can't exceed the absolute value of that number. So if you wrote neg5, that would mean only people, only players with a intelligence of five or lower could say it. And then the J field is the test field. Is a field. The test field is a test to see if the player can even say that line. Again, this was left empty on NPC lines, so it NPCs could just always say their line if they got directed to by a script, but the player character — you would only see that line appear in their list of options if they matched it. If the tests in here — I'll go over in a second what the tests are, there are a lot of them.

Um, the L column is the response Line. This is, if this line is selected by the player, even if it generates — if it's generated dialogue, which I'll talk about, it will ultimately jump to that line in the dialogue file as the next NPC response, unless it was a zero. If it a zero, that means we're done. This is an exit line, if it's negative, then it. Means take the absolute value of that line and jump into the associated dialogue script and run the script commands that are there. This was only done if, there were too many script commands you wanted to run, then would fit in the next field and the final field, which is the n column, which is called the result field. These, the result field, are script elements. They're very similar to scripts. They were just a few op codes that would be executed if, it was a player line, if the player selects this line, then the result field are run. If an NPC speaks the line, then the result field is executed. Now, by speak the line, I mean actually say it in conversation, because there are, there are script commands to take these lines, whether it's a player line or an npcc line, and float it over your head like a as a bark or float message or something else.

If, it's used in that capacity, the result line is ignored. Uh, it's only if it appears in a dialogue. So that's effectively what a dialogue line is. So let me explain how some of these work in here. Um, I highly recommend that you watch the generated dialogue video that I made, because it is as you can see. The first three lines of this dialogue are all the player responses are generated, so let me go over what it means also. You notice at the end, starting at Q, I've just written things down. That's because anything past that last bracket on P was were just ignored, so you could write notes over there to yourself and that's what I'm using here.

So line two is Bon, because that's being used on a player. It stands for barter, because the player saying it, the player will ask the NPC: hey, I would like to buy some items, I would like to see what you have in inventory, I'd like to see what you're selling. And it opens up an entire subtree where the NPC, a, agrees to do it, and then opens up the, UI for bartering, and then, when that is done, it would go to line eight which, if you look at line eight, is the NPC going? Is there anything else? Line three is U colon 12. UK colon is asking the NPC to use a skill on your behalf.

They're all numbered. Skill 12 was repair, so this would generate a line saying the for the player saying I would like you to repair something for me, and again, that would make an entire generated subtree where you would select the item you want repaired. The NPC would tell you how much it. Would cost. You'd either give them money or say you want to give them money but not have enough, or refuse. Whatever that all happens in the Ukon subtree, and then, when it's done, you can see that its L column is eight. So once again, the NPC — after all the stuff is done with repair, it would go. Is there anything else? And then line four is the last generated dialogue.

That's Kon. That stood for ask a question. Um, this would again open up a generated dialog tree with a variety of questions that the player could ask based on the story state of the game. And when that was done — you see that it's when it's done — um, it would go to line 22, which is cut off of the bottom, but then it's like anything else you need to know. So that's, that, okay.

Line five: it says I need you to do something. Now, notice that there is a field in the test column which is J. It says fo, says that the player can only say this if the NPC he's talking to is a follower. It's currently a follower, so if they are, then this line would appear and say: I need you to do something, would jump line 15 and say: what do you want me to do?

And if you look at all the results, it's move away. The player respones: move away, move closer, wait here, disband or go back. All of those have something in their end colum which is their result field. If you say move away, it um calls s so, which is a op code for spread out. So the, NPC will literally move uh, far, away from you and maintain a farther, uh follow distance. If you say move closer, it ex, it execute — sorry, the dogs in here — it executes SC, which is stay close, and it makes them closer in their formation. If you say wait, here, it does wa, which makes them leave the party and stand where they're currently standing and wait for you to come back. If you say disband, it's LV, which makes them leave the party entirely.

Um, in fact, and if you go back to line six, you can see that the player says let's go. But if you look at the J column, the test field is wa, it can that that line, let's go can only be say said to a follower, that's in weight mode. And when you use this line, look at the result field, it's UW, which is unweight.

So that's kind of a highle general idea of how these things worked. Um, just to give you anide idea, the there were a huge number of test codes. Not all of them could be used on both PCS and NPCs. Some could be used on PCS only. Some could be used on NPC's only. A lot were usable on both. I believe there were one, two, three. There were about oo two dozen of these test codes. Um, there were also in the result fields that things that could happen. There was also probably another two dozen of those.

So if there wasn't a result op code for you to use, keep in mind you could always, for the line number, you jump to give a negative number and jump to a script and do everything in a script and you can. I have a whole video on how Arcanum scripting worked. So, in effect, what this dialogue system let you do was generate really complex trees with NPCs: where the NPC or the player, the NPC doing saying a line, or the player picking a line, could cause effects to happen in the world, and lines could be chosen not to appear for some states that the player was in. So you could have lots of player responses but at any given time they couldn't show all of them.

Now, as I mentioned, we did not parse the EXL files directly, and I had three reasons for that one. It was faster to extract this to a text file and read it from a text file, then to parse the Excel file. There's a lot of extraneous data in a, an Excel file, so it was slower to parse an Excel file, and back in the '90s and early 2000s every cycle counted s related to that. Excel files were way bigger than you would think they would be when we extracted just this data to a text file. Much, smaller, and again, we had to load these files in order to process them and memory was at a premium.

Uh, in fact I believe the uh, now that I think about it, we had a macro in our Excel. You could just press a button and it would write it out to a text file. Uh, Jason Anderson wrote that macro.

The man had many skills, and then the third reason that I didn't process Excel files is formats changed all the time. A new version of an Excel file would come out. I wasn't going to write new parsing functions every time.

Microsoft felt like updating the format of a Excel file. So writing it out to a uh text file meant it was faster to read, it was less memory to read and I only had to write that import function once. So if you look, if you, ever crack open the um Arcanum that files, you will see a lot of files with the dlg suffix. Those are plain text files and when you look them up you'll see something very similar to this Excel spreadsheet, but it's in plain text.

By the way, the other huge Advantage we had in doing this as Excel spreadsheets and keeping the row numbers separate from the uh dialog line numberb was if you wanted to renumber the rows to make space so you could insert more player responses. Or you just wanted to organize your NPC lines and get NPC like you had several NPC statements and you wanted to add an extra one in because it made sense to be with those. You could do that trivially in Excel and it wouldn't affect any of the line numbers in B, in the B column, you, because they were disassociated. They normally had nothing to do with the row, so that worked really well. And then when you wrote it out to a, the text file, you lost all the row numbers, but we didn't do use them for anything, so it was fine. Anyway, this was our primitive but very powerful method of doing dialogue files in Arcanum. Whether you want to mod or, uh, make a dialogue system yourself, you know, have fun with this.
