+++
title = "Editing Your Game Story"
date = "2024-08-21"
id = "H7E-tiFDnrs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design", "Feedback"]
summary = "I talk about how to edit your game's story, both how to look for problems and how to suggest solutions."
references = ["LptJrOO2zSQ", "fzUzRqmgJKE", "OoJ6CDDfYiU", "2hDxie2Fnvo", "sCGeOsHV4Ag", "fHUAFYDzN3U", "-72btgrwKzA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Axion as a hypothetical particle to explain dark matter through their ability to violate CP symmetry in Quantum chromodynamics — wait, wrong Channel.

Today, I want to talk about editing your game story. I'm not a good writer — well, I'm not a writer, especially not a good one. However, I frequently find myself giving feedback to narrative designers because of my ability. My feedback doesn't take the form of do this, I know better, but instead I give feedback in the form of: I know what you're trying to do and it's not coming through now. Sometimes I know what they're trying to do because I've talked to them, or it's one of the — uh, discussed pillars we had, for here's what I want the characters to do. Sometimes it's just I'm playing this character and I'm like this character seems to be trying to be my friend, but they're just coming across as a sarcastic jerk that I don't want anywhere near me.

So we talk about that. Um, it's especially if, when I'm playing a game and I have a feeling about something to me, that's perfectly fine to talk about it, as long as my subsequent recommendations are constructive and I'll talk about that. And, by the way, the dog is sound asleep and moving around on my feet, apologies.

So the biggest problem I've noticed with narrative designers in the game industry is they think too much like authors of books or movie screenplays. I I understand why many of them were trained that way, especially if they went to school to learn to write or they're coming to us from another industry. They were taught to think of their narrative in terms of es and flows and ups and downs and you know dramatic points.

The problem is — I've talked at length about why this is a bad way of thinking, uh, and for a couple reasons and, by the way, all the videos will be linked in the description. The first reason this is bad is it completely ignores player agency. If a narrative designer approaches their characters as in terms of this will happen, then this will happen. They are completely disregarding that the player may not make those things happen, the player may not do any of those things. And then when you combine that with another topic I've talked about at length, nonlinearity — that the player may not do ABC, but they may do BAC or CBA, and this is something that your characters have to react to. You need to expect this plan for it and react to it.

This is something that would never happen in a book, never happen in a movie. The viewer of a movie, has no agency over the plot. The viewer of a movie can't make the scenes go in a different order than the director, uh, or the editor finally made the movie go in. So this is a huge difference between games and movies. So because of that, I find that you can't take a lot of the advice that you get from workshops and established authors of books and screenplays, because the recommendation is completely antithetical to what you're going to have to do in games.

I'll give you an example. Let's say: well, a, common recommendation that I've heard about, for that works in book, books and movies, is: if you can remove a scene and it doesn't affect the story, then that scene is not necessary. And similarly, if you can extract an entire character from your book or your movie — in other words, they don't appear in any of the scene — e their scenes are deleted or their scenes are Rewritten not to include them. Then that character is not needed.

This advice is great for the linear, unchanging medium of books and screenplays. It is terrible for Games, first of all, it's almost impossible to do um you, can't really look at a character and go, yes, this character will never matter, or this scene will never matter, because you don't know what's going to be important to a player. Because of player agency. You don't know if a particular character is going to be important to them, if it is going to be a devastating blow to their playthrough. And that's true for characters or even scenes or an entire map. You can't say we can delete this and everything will be fine, because you may, let's say, I make a dialogue character and you're removing a character or even an entire area of the map where most of the dialogues take place. That will devastate my playthrough.

A combat character, especially someone who just kills everyone on site, isn't even going to notice. It wasn't even a blip on their radar as they played through the game. So that just understanding that players will do different things and can make players can make different character builds that have different expectations of what they want to get out of your game, that makes you look at all your characters and all your scen in all your maps in a new light. How do they serve all these different kinds of characters?

Uh, a perfect example from Vampire Bloodlines were the Nosferatu, to the Nosferatu, just by being seen, would break masquerade, which was the one rule every vampire had to obey, which is not to reveal vampires to the general public. But naratu were so obviously not human — they were monstrous looking — that they had to hide.

In Bloodlines we solved this by putting a sewer Network all throughout Los Angeles for the nas veratu Clan — a character in that Clan. Those sewer lines were absolutely necessary for your playthrough. They had to be there, they had to connect to a lot of things, they had to work. For almost all the other clans it was basically a hey, neat, look, there's an alternate way into this building.

Oh, I don't have. I couldn't talk my way in or find a key. I guess I go through the sewer.

The naratu didn't have the option for those first two. So that sewer line, which is optional for your Clans playthrough, is absolutely required for the Nosferatu. So, trying to use that advice of can I remove this and it won't affect the game, yeah, for most of the Clans it won't affect anything.

For the nas feratu it will devastate them. So what do I recommend then? For games — and this is an interesting thing, because I'm going to say diversity and I'm going to explain what I mean. In order to make sure that you've edited your game story correctly, you — you yourself, if you can — and I'll talk about this — should play it with a variety of different character builds. So there need to be a diversity in your own testing patterns. You need to be able to shake it up now. Some people can't do that.

Um, I've seen online a lot of people go. No matter how I start playing Skyrim, I always end up a stealth Archer.

If that's your way of playing, then you're going to have to rely on the other two ways of doing this, which is really diverse Focus groups and having a really diverse QA team. Actually having a diverse team in general will help diversity in all the different stages. I mean, if you have a very diverse writing staff, they will automatically think of all these different ways of going through the game. But diversity in your focus groups in QA are especially important for this point I'm making, and that is, you want your focus groups to be full of people who play differently and react differently to what's going on in the game to see if your story can withstand their method of playing. This is really important for you to test, to see if your story can hold up, because the last thing you want to do is ship your game and then discover that, oh shoot, there's this one bloodline clan that can't finish the game or worse, it's incredibly difficult to finish with them. If that's what you wanted, if you want to say, hey, it's really, really hard to finish blood lines with an osaru, that's. Okay, but if you wanted all the blood lines to be kind of equally balanced, then it's not okay.

Now a number of you are probably going. I don't want to do this. I want to do my own thing. I'm trying to tell my story. I don't care about this.

That's fine, if you're making a certain genre of game that's linear and has very different, very little player agency, that's fine. Just bear in mind that some of your decisions are going to make your game very Niche a. It won't appeal to a lot of people because if they don't play the game the way you play the game, they're not going to care. And it doesn't mean your game isn't well-crafted, it's just not entertaining to the people who don't play the way you play.

And one other thing to throw in here about the diversity is me: being colorblind has helped. On many games that I've worked on and even a few that I haven't. I have basically helped other companies work on their games when they found out that I was full color blind. I, I think I mentioned I got sent an early version of left for dead from valve to test uh the game and I found things wrong with the interface. There were areas on maps that I could not see my Crosshair for my gun, which was devastating if I got into a fight in that area of the map. So it's a weird thing to think colorblindness can help you make a better game for everyone. But that's an example of how a diversity in your testing group greatly helped you find things that were going to be bad for your game.

And that, of course, has nothing to do with the story. That's a game, pure game mechanic thing. But if you accept that game mechanic improvement from a diverse testing group, then you've got to accept it's going to help with your story as well. So one last thing I want to say about offering edits to a game storyline. Uh, maybe a few things. Um one: it is really easy to be negative when you're writing down your suggestions for storyline edits, and the reason for that is you're usually looking for problems. So when you look for problems, that means you're pointing them out.

It's going to sound negative. This is something I've had to explain to some of my clients in the last few years when they ask me to professionally review their game — and this has happened a lot — where they're like, hey, we've got a vertical slice or we've got an alpha, we've got a prototype, and I'm like, okay, I tell them ahead of time, there is going to be a tendency to see what I'm giving you as negative, because you've asked me: is there anything in here that needs to change? You're not asking me to validate how great your game is. You're effectively asking me to go: did we do everything right? And if my answer is no, I've got to tell you what I think you've done wrong. That's going to come across as a little negative. My suggestion here — and I have a video about that — is to always make sure that your review contains constructive Solutions.

Don't just say, God, your characters are written terribly, say, hey, I've noticed your characters have a tendency to behave this way or treat the character this way, which makes me not want to interact with them, which led me to trying to do other things and then being forced to interact with them and being frustrated. Some of this is very subjective, but it's I've talked about almost everything about making a game is subjective, but if you can make your solution constructive, hey, could you have a character that isn't sarcastic? Could you have a character that isn't nasty to me?

That's enjoyable to interact with. You may find that there's a lot more people who like playing your game. You don't have to do this as long as you have enough variety that I think one of the solutions would work for me in my play style. But just by offering constructive Solutions may get my client to think of other solutions that I didn't recommend that are similar to the ones I recommended. So, anyway, that's how I think game stories should be edited, even though I myself am not a good story writer. So I hope this helps you writing your own game stories.
