+++
title = "Fallout's Effect On Me"
date = "2024-07-25"
id = "hEY_tJqUEPY"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Fallout", "Careers"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fallout's effect on me, which seems like a very personal, self-reflected, reflective, almost narcissistic topic."
references = ["ETVsAHbTh2c", "d0YwWVBDERQ", "YMY5LUNdS-8", "ho-g8KVx9hU", "mHMFG8uvOb0"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fallout's effect on me, which seems like a very personal, self-reflected, reflective, almost narcissistic topic.

But I'm answering someone's question. Super duper asks: did you ever feel like sometimes your career was sort of defined by Fallout, like obviously it was your what we would call, in the film industry, breakout role, with it being such a massively successful and popular game? But do you ever feel like being tied to Fallout held you back or gave you opportunities you otherwise would not have had, and just for funsies, with it being such an impactful and influential game? Would you care toine on a world wherein Fallout had been cancelled and you think they might have, and how you think that might have affected our culture?

Wow, that's a big question. I can touch on it. Um, it's like everything I'm going to say.

There were pros and cons to having made Fallout. Um, I can tell you that when I left interplay and I wasn't sure — what I wanted to do and Leonard and Jason left and we had looked for work and we couldn't find it and then we started a company. Getting a contract was hard but Fallout opened doors for us. It helped a lot that between the three of us we had done a lot of work on Fallout. We could answer any questions they had on codee, on uh, design, um, on narrative, on Art. Between the three of us we had touched all of those things. So a lot of Publishers knew getting us got a lot of ability, a lot of experience and just handson knowledge.

Interestingly, — interestingly, though I don't think it would have helped, Fallout would have helped. If I had wanted to make a game besides an RPG. I mean I mentioned that I was approached as soon as it came out that IID left interplay. I got approached by EA.

To make Wasteland 2, which I turned down. I didn't want to make another post-apocalyptic game. Now I was fine making another role playing game, but in the back of my head I was always going: I want to make a lot of gangs. But in the same sense that Fallout opened doors for me, it only opened certain doors and because you made the movie analogy, I was very much like a typ, cast actor. People wanted to hire me, but they wanted to hire me for role playing games, post-apocalyptic games, that skewed a little dark. Um, I mean, if, even if you look at troa, after we finished Arcanum for Sierra, the Publishers who came to us were like: you want to make vampire Bloodlines, you want to make D and D? We had no offers for things that were not role playing games especially.

And now, that Fallout, in Arcanum, we're kind of in our on our resumés. People are like, well, these are the RPG guys. And I mean there's far worse things that could have happened in my career than to be labeled an RPG guy, because I loved RPGs and I love making RPGs. But it really wasn't going to be possible for me to make much of anything else, at least at that time, and not to blame Publishers — it wasn't just Publishers who did this. When I would talk to journalists, they' asked me about other games, but it was always RPGs. Uh, they, that's about tabletop RPGs.

Uh, when I — when, after I shut down Troy can, I went to look for work carbine, I got the job at carbine because of my work on RPGs and it was interesting. When I went to Austin, I was really well received. That was the home office for. NC soft.

I was really well received and a lot of people were like, oh, we're super excited to be working with you. And I was like, wow, I'm impressed because you know Richard Garett works here. And they're like, oh, we love your RPGs too. So that was cool. It was cool to be welcomed and known.

However, there were people on the actual development team who were a little H, this is an MMO, this isn't an RPG. G, what do you know? Um, so it was an odd give and take with things like that. Later, after I left carbine, when I was looking for work, it was hard to find people who expressed any interest in me being able to do anything besides me having a lot of background now in code and design, both system mechanic and story. People assumed: well, don't you want to be doing an RPG? When I I remember being at one company, I mentioned this in my video on aism and they basically saidwell, why do you want to work here? And I'm like, I love your game and a lot of my skill set is directly applicable to the game you're making, even though it wasn't, you know, an RPG per se. So, just trying to get into action RPGs, that door was kind of closed to me because people were like: well, I don't think you'd really understand how to make an action RPG and I'm like I have a really good RPG Foundation, the step to making an action RPG.

I more anyone. I think I'd understand what the difference would be, but that wasn't what happened. So it if you even want some idea, I have a video that I made months ago — a year ago I think — where I had insomnia so I started showing off. The toys I was making. Those toys are nothing like the games I made.

One of them's a space combat simulator. It's not an RPG, it's not a fantasy game, it's not post-apocalyptic, it's just a space combat Sim and I loved making It's one of my favorite games was star Raiders. So my ideas for IP, IPS, include RPG ideas. Um, in fact, tomorrow, for Friday Funday, I think — I'm going to come up with a. I'm going to talk about an, IP. I was just IP idea. I was just looking at in here because I'm like, oo, I'm not going to do that, but maybe someone else will make it. But I've got a lot of ideas for things that aren't RPGs or are for system mechanics or settings that don't have to be used in RPGs. But I think after Fallout some of those doors were closed.

For me — and I'm not saying they were. I might have been able to get into them with as much effort as someone who didn't have any experience, but I think some of them were a little more forcefully closed for me. Like I would, they would rather hire someone with no experience than someone whose experience seemed not applicable to the game they were making, if that makes any sense. And I never quite understood that, because when I couldn't find people whose experience were exactly what I needed, I would broaden it out and go: well, this guy hasn't programmed RPGs, but he's programmed Games. Boom, this person hasn't written stories for RPGs, but she's written stories for games that weren't role playing games.

Boom, that's. I mean, you, try to get experience which is as inlined as possible, but you broaden it.

Sometimes I saw doors closed because, well, you're the RPG guy. Now, super duper had an interesting question that he ended up with, which is asking about a world without Fallout. And it's really hard to imagine, you know, do a wh if scenario if we had never made Fallout. But I will say this: I firmly believe that good ideas arrive when their time has come.

So I think games like Fallout would have been made even if Fallout hadn't been made, and by that I mean I think games with that were more skill-based rather than class-based, games with lots of choice and consequence, um, games with a mix of darkness and humor, all the stuff that may like about Fallout. I think that would have been made anyway, even without Fallout. Maybe it would have been made in a couple years, maybe it would have been made in 10 years, but I think it would have come eventually. So I think, while Fallout did have a big effect on games, I think the effects would have happened anyway because their time had come.

And lastly, let me just say, look at this channel. Um, I think a lot of people originally came to this channel because they knew about Fallout. They came for Fallout, they came for the Fallout stories, they came for discussion about Fallout, how it was designed and coded. But then they ended up staying because they discovered I made other games and I had other stories and other experiences and it kind of. You see, people sometimes say that like, oh, I didn't know you made tyranny, I didn't know you worked on Bloodlines. So I think people discovered there was a lot more to me than just Fallout. But fallout's what got them here and I. I think the same thing happened in my career later on. People originally saw me as the Fallout guy but then discovered, hey, there's a lot more to this guy than just Fallout in terms of games but in terms of other things like chocolate and cooking and other things. So the long that was my long answer.

My short answer is Fallout being known for? For making Fallout opened many doors for me and closed a few too, and I think the world would be fundamentally the same without Fallout. I think the essence of Fallout. There'd be a little diminishment for not having that essence of Fallout in the world, but I don't think there'd be a substantially different uh attack that the game industry would have taken and super duper. I hope that answers your very good question.
