+++
title = "Wading In The Shallows"
date = "2024-11-12"
id = "HgiVDrTd8Mo"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life"]
summary = "I talk about how, if you truly want to understand something, you have to go deep. You can't just wade in the shallows."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about waiting in the shallows.

I'll tell you what I mean by this. I actually have an alternate title which I'll give you at the end. Um, waiting in the shallows is what I've said to people in the past, when I want to express that you can't really know something, you can't really understand a topic after just a casual involvement in it. This you've heard people talk about like armchair quarterbacks, and you know people like to give medical advice because they looked up something on WebMD.

I'm talking about that. I'm talking about people who think they've gone deep on things but they're still waiting in the shallows. I've gone deep in my life. I've gone deep on just a few things. I've gone really deep in computer science, starting in classes in high school. I got a Bachelor's degree in computer science from an engineering school, so it was a very hardcore computer science degree which included electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, wiring, breadboards. To do nand and no and orgate. So you know this is what a chip is doing, but you're doing it at a much bigger scale.

Um, I've gone deep. I don't think anybody watching this channel can argue that I haven't gone deep into game development. I understand game development, been doing it for more than four decades. I'm almost halfway into my fifth decade. That's a lot of game development, similarly, I've gone deep in business. I've run a business. I know what it means to run a business. Lots of people like to talk about business without ever actually having run one, and I'm talking not even solo, I'm talking about you run a business with employees and payroll and HR and that whole rig roll.

Um um, chocolate is another example of something I've gone deep on. If you don't believe me, go look at my chocolate blog. It's got 2,000 entries, if anybody wants to argue that I haven't gone deep on chocolate, I'm coming at you.

So what? So that's just four things I could throw out.

There is I've gone deep on. What did it teach me to go really, really deep on these topics? Probably the biggest lesson you learn is what you think you know when you start out in some new area is not what you were going to discover. And then think later and there's a weird transition where that happens, because you start learning a topic and you very quickly think you're learning all of it and you understand it, but then, when you actually have to put it into practice, you discover you don't really know this. Oh, by the way, if you have to teach that topic to someone, that's when you really learn what you don't know I've taught before. Maybe I should do a whole video on teaching and what I learned from teaching. But if you want to know what you don't know about a topic, teach it to a class of people. You will quickly learn all the things you do not know. What's interesting about that is as you learn the magnitude of what you don't know. If you keep going deeper, you will eventually learn those things. You will learn that there are still some things you don't know, but you will learn a great deal and you will look back at the shallow and what you were like when you were in the shallows and just go, wow, there was a lot of unearned confidence back then.

I — I think I've mentioned that Fallout was a lot of our first projects. It was people we had done — everyone on the team had done other games, but for many of us, it was the first time in a lead role. It was the first time we were making an RPG, especially one from scratch. For almost everybody involved I think it was the first time inventing an IP from scratch. We were confident we should not have been We got lucky on a lot of things.

There was, you know, lightning in a bottle. There was the right people at the right time, but we were totally in the shallows there and at any moment a shark could have come along that we had no idea was there. So to give you a, counter, there's a lot of things that I've gone into far enough to know that I don't know that topic. So once you get past the shallows and you start waiting in a little deeper, that's when you learn I don't know this nearly as well.

I've talked about writing. I'm not a good writer and I've tried writing. I've been in the shallows and started to walk into the deep end and realized what I don't know to move it out of the writing. Example: Network programming is something I've tried to do and I quickly realized all the stuff I don't know. Graphics programming is stuff I've tried to do and I've done and I've done somewhat successfully. I had, you know, the.

The original Fallout engine was mine, but between my color blindness and just my the breadth and depth of that field, I just could only go so far if I wanted to do other things. So I found it was a lot easier to find a graphics programming expert and hand things off to them, which is exactly what happened at carbine, and there were brilliant Graphics programmers there and that's why that game, in addition to the, really good artist — just looked so good. That engine had so many cool graphics features.

But what this means is I've waited past the shallows in some areas and I almost drowned. I I quickly discovered that there were things like it's really deep out here and there are rip tides and I think there's something nibbling on my toes. I think there's, you know, Predators out here. I was scared of going any deeper. I could see how deep it was getting in a way that you can't if you're just walking along the beach or dipping your toe in the water.

So this let me recognize and appreciate people who were good at those things, like writers, good writers. I recognize them, I recognize their work, I recognize the writing. I appreciate how good it is. This also means that I can advise narrative designers. Maybe, maybe not, should I be a lead narrative? Designer, but I can certainly give advice to narrative designers — and I have on this channel because I can recognize good writing.

I've watched the process in others. I know what you have to do, even if I myself can't do that work, and this is something you need to understand. If you want to be a lead at something doesn't mean you have to be the best person in the room at it means you have to understand what's involved in it so that you can manage people who might be better than you. So that's part of this whole waiting in the shallows thing as well.

It's sort of like: um, you've heard the forest and tree, seeing the forest without the trees. Sometimes you can go deep enough that you can see the forest even if you don't understand all the trees. That's mixing metaphors, I know, but something after out. There, so another thing I want you to do, if this is making sense to you: take something that you already know really, really well and be honest with yourself. Not something you've just casually dipped your toe in, but you take a topic that you know really well and think back to how you thought about that topic early on and all the things that you were wrong about. It's tough to be honest with yourself about this, but think back to like, wow, I thought this part of coding would be easier. I thought it would be easy to animate models or I thought it would be easy to, you know, write character dialogue and then, if you really can remember what you misunderstood at the beginning, this will give you a great view. When you're talking to, people aren't deeply involved, so I mean you don't need to be rude or egotistical to people who aren't, who are just starting to wait in and they're starting to think they know a lot. But you do need to take their comments into perspective and understand.

These are people who are just waiting in. You know, maybe they see things you didn't, but you know they haven't been in the deep end yet and your job is to help them, guide them. Maybe not be a lifeguard, maybe be a swim instructor, but that's kind of what you have to do once you're really knowledgeable at something, because if you want other people to get really good at it, you want them to learn what's what it's like in the deep end, but you don't want them to drown. You want them, you want to point out the rip tiddes and the Sharks and everything, so they learn how to swim in the deep end without just running back onto the beach and never going out there again.

That's kind of what your — your job is going to have to be as a lead or director. Now I said I had an alternate title for this. My alternate title — instead of waiting — waiting in the shallows — was: the beach is not the ocean, and I think if you've been listening, you know what I mean by that.

If you really truly want to understand something, you have to go deep. So standing on a beach looking at the water or even waiting in up to your ankles is not going to let you understand the ocean. You need to really go deep to understand it, and that's something you truly won't understand until you go deep. So try to pick and choose. You can't go deep on everything. You can't be a specialist in all Fields. And if you're a generalist, you're probably not going as deep. As some of those Specialists, but just try to understand what you've gone deep in and what you haven't and keep that perspective as you do your work. Hope this makes sense.
