+++
title = "Fast Travel"
date = "2024-11-18"
id = "hyj6X7EaBsY"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "I talk about the pros and cons of fast travel in games...and why you probably need to include it in your game."
references = ["TiL2wa66wxs"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fast travel.

Now this is a topic I I thought I had covered this, but when I went and looked through my videos, I basically briefly mentioned it in a video about Quest markers, which I'll link below, but I didn't actually talk about it that much and not into the detail that I think some people wanted. In fact, I got a question from a snow crash who asked: have you spoken about fast travel on RPGs and some games? I feel like you can use it to essentially bypass things like encumbrance, hardcore mechanics, Random Encounters, Etc. Yes, you are absolutely right, you can use it. Many games let you, especially after you buy a couple perks, avoid a lot of the mechanics that make the game more difficult. So let's talk about that.

What's especially interesting about fast travel is — I did not Ed to include it in my games — Fallout, Arcanum, Temple. All these are isometric games that you cannot fast travel in. Now that doesn't mean you had to walk there in isometric mode either, although you could do that in Arcanum and there were pros and cons to doing that. Uh, if you walk there you might come across something and stop and look at it. You also you could have Random Encounters that way there. The Random Encounters you did that way were a little different than the ones you had on the map, but the way that would work is you already had the world map up in those games, so when you clicked on your destination, a line would just appear and show you going there — and I found that this had a lot of advantages for, in particular for a role playing game — you could show the travel time when people were hovering over things. It could show it kind of take you a day and a half to get there. And then it actually shows you moving there. So there's this obvious passage of time being demonstrated.

You could also then answer the effect, answer the questions of: do you what happens to your status effects? Do they wear off? Um, because you know time is passing. Time is obviously passing You could also, uh, display any newly spotted pois. We did. You know that.

That was something we planned on in Fallout, when you were going from one place to another on the world map. If something new appeared in the world map, you would. You would see it and you could reclick onto it and stop where you were going and go somewhere new.

Uh, and then finally, as the original question asked, there were Random Encounters in all those games. That could happen, because you're moving along the world map and then we usually stop, show a symbol and drop. You down to a map because you had a random encounter.

Now I like that stuff. I liked all those things and I will talk about you know why I? I particularly wanted to include things like that.

But fast travel got very popular in role playing games. After a few of them did it, and I see this — this isn't an issue solely with fast travel, just like voice over or having local Maps. You know so, if you're in a map, you can bring up a local map of the area and it shows a defined area. It shows you if you're Town. It shows all the buildings in the streets.

If you're in a dungeon, it shows your dungeon map. Local Maps — a assist — is a feature that we didn't used to put that in, and now, if you don't do it, there's a lot of people who complain about your game is too hard or if they notice it missing you, get complained about not having it. So there's a lot of features that are popular now that people get very, very upset if you don't include. But, as I think the original questioner showed, um, there are people who didn't want these things in there or don't want them as to the extent they're put in.

This is a theme in all my videos. No matter what design choice you make, there's going to be a camp of people who hate that choice and a camp of people love it.

Just get used to that, but because so many people like fast travel and now expect fast travel, more and more games put it in and now almost every game has it. I'm trying to think if there's any game I've played recently that did not have fast travel, maybe Pathfinder didn't have. That?

Um, anyway, even in games that include fast travel, it is frequently restricted in lots of different ways. You can't fast travel anywhere you haven't been. So if someone tells you, oh, you need to visit the cave of Despair, and they mark it on your map, you can't. If you click on it says you've never been there, so the game at least makes you go there the first time before. Or you can then fast travel there and back. You frequently can't fast travel when you're encumbered. So if you're encumbered enough that your character is now moving more slowly, you can't fast travel.

However, some games that do this let you come up with some way of evading it. Either you can put all your stuff on a companion NPC and you can travel when companion NPCs are encumbered, or maybe you can buy a perk or something. Like similar that lets you still fast travel when you're encumbered, something like that. That most places, most games, have places you can't fast travel out of. Usually it's inside a building or effectively inside a instanced location, like inside a dungeon or in a building. You have to go outside to and be on something that, that the you're immediately on the world map. You have to go outside to do that.

Most disabled fast travel if you're in the middle of combat, some even disable fast travel if there are enemies close enough to you, have to like move away from them, even if you're not in combat with them yet they're saying, nope, you can't do that. There are a few games out there that include fast travel. Among the difficulty options you can turn on and off, but I want to point out that, just like with Quest. Markers, some people, even though the game has an option to switch it off, many people choose to have it on and then complain about it being there. Now, sometimes your complaints are valid and people have mentioned it on this channel.

Hey, the game was designed obviously with Quest markers, so the game doesn't provide you enough detail to find the destination. If you turn them off, you know like a character will just say you got to go to the cave of Despair bye, and if you don't turn on the quest marker, you have no idea where that is. There are some games out there that let you turn Quest markers on and off, where the character will say you have to go to the cave of Despair.

It's Northwest of here, right before the you know mountain of despair. You could find it. You're going to have to go looking around people. Often turn on the quest marker anyway and say that's, too hard, I don't want to do that sometime. So because of that, sometimes people's complaints aren't valid. They complain anyway, even though they have an option to turn it off. One of the big problems with that is often when people complain about a game online, especially in a written review, whether they're a professional reviewer or they're just putting up something in Steam.

Other players don't fact check it, they just accept it. So the game now gets bad PR and sometimes even bad professional reviews based on something that either isn't true and sometimes even by people who never even played the game. You see this a lot when, um fans review bomb a game that they don't own and have never played, but they're complaining about something that they heard was in it. Some of that stuff is subjective, but some of it is. They complain about a feature: that there's a there's an option to turn off.

So that's weird, now, from my point of view, I think that fast travel often diminishes a game, um, it makes the world feel smaller and safer. Spe some of the specific things that I think fast travel gets rid of that I think are really important and make a an, especially a role playing game, really really fun: Random Encounters. One thing that makes your world feel dangerous and big is you have to travel through it and as you travel, you have a chance of randomly running into encounters.

Maybe some of them are nice. It's traveling Merchant, you can buy things from them, or maybe you can travel along with them. Maybe it's bad, maybe it's Bandits — they're like we're going to kill you and take your stuff — or maybe it's just. You see.

Uh, in the distance, something, maybe you want to go explore it, maybe you can just keep going, um, but you never be able to find it again. Um, Fallout had special encounters that if you kept moving, you would never find them again, um, but then they also had pois that you were seeing, that were marked on your map app. You could keep going and you could always come back to them later if you wanted to. Related to that: fast travel frequently eliminates Discovery, even if it lets you, if it doesn't let you, fast travel to some place you've never been to. So let's say you're in town a and somebody tells you have to go to town B and you can't fast travel there because you've never been there. Well, once you go there, you can always fast travel there, despite the fact that you may have never. Been there in that direction, if later on you walk from B to C um notice that you can fast travel from C back to a, even though that path from C to a you've never gone along. You've gone to B and then you've gone to C, but now you're going to fast travel right back to a. There could be something really cool between town a and town C and you aren't going to find it unless you walk.

Thanks Windows, that's been a while since that's happened. I usually turn off the sound.

Sorry, um, so fast eliminates a lot of discoverability and some of the fun things that we did in some of my games that didn't have fast travel — Fallout. Temple um Arcanum had places where we put in things to discover because we knew you'd be walking between those two locations and then finally fast. Travel causes a lot of trouble because it eliminates the obvious passage of time, and I mentioned that for terms of status effects. When you're fast traveling, what happens to status effects? What happens to and the?

These can be things from like effects you have on you like you've been poisoned, or even you have a flashlight on when you fast travel? Um, do these effects wear off? If they do, did you get informed they wear off or are they acting like they wear off when you arrive at the location, or are you told they wore off while you were traveling? If they don't wear off, are they suspended? So, when you arrive at the new location, do they finish up their duration or do you arrive at the new location and then they immediately shut off?

Um, if um they don't wear all, how are charges used? If you like, leave your flashlight on and it's supposed to use a charge every 10 minutes and you tra fast travel for a day. Did it just use up a ton of charges on that? If it didn't? What's going on there?

So it feels strange, if fast travel doesn't have a passage of time, it basically turns fast travel into teleportation, whether or not it changes the calendar, if the calendar has no effect, it's basically teleportation now. So I've complained about fast travel and the causes it has, but I also understand that a lot of people like it. There are a million ways you could solve this. As a designer, I will throw out one isn't necessarily the best one, I'm just throwing out an idea of how you could solve it. What if you put in fast travel in your game, but you can only fast travel Two Towns? You can't travel fast travel to a dungeon, you can't tra fast. Travel to a cave, you can't fast travel to a mountain. You can only you travel fast travel to settled locations like towns, cities, Villages. You could even make this um something that you support by saying: oh, there's a network of um.

If it's sci-fi, you could say: they're Transporters. If it's fantasy, you could say: well, there's a wagon that you can go between. You can just, there are always wagons going from different places. You can just jump on the wagon. You, could still say you can fast travel from anywhere.

Of course, which kind of breaks that whole explanation if you're trying to do that which could be subject to restrictions? Like you know, you can't be in combat, you have to be outside. There can't be enemies nearby, you can't be encumbered, you can still have those. So when you leave the cave, of Despair, you can still fast travel back to a town. But when you're in the town, even if you've been to the cave of Despair 13 times, you still have to walk back to it. This way, players still have to walk to adventuring sites, but they don't have to waste time going back to a home base to sell or to just quit. If that's what they want to do, you know for the quit, their session or whatever that it is they want to do now.

My overall feelings on fast travel are that fast travel in general makes a game easier. A game with fast travel is a lot easier than a game without it, so I view it as sort of an easy mode play style. So if it's something you like, keep in mind you've chosen something that makes the game easier to play, but like many monitored features, which I've mentioned — voice over, aim, assist, local Maps — if you fail to include it there, you will get a lot of complaints from people, and this is especially true for role playing games. There is just an expectation that these things will be in your game. So that's how I view fast travel. It is now expected, whether or not I want to include it or not, there are ways you can put restrictions on it. So you still have fast travel in your game, but maybe it still allows the discoverability or the passage of time or Random Encounters the way you wanted. This is basically up to you and, like I've said multiple times, no matter what you decide to do, there's going to be people like it and people don't. So, anyway, I hope that answered your question. A snow crash.
