+++
title = "GNW & TIG, My OS Abstraction Libraries"
date = "2023-06-03"
id = "hZEosFcqmcU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Programming"]
summary = "I talk about GNW (GNW's Not Windows) and TIG (TIG Isn't GNW), my operating system abstraction libraries that allow my games to be more easily ported to different computer systems."
references = []
+++

Hi. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about gnaw and Tig, that's gnaw gnw and Tig These are operating system abstraction libraries that I wrote in the 90s to basically hide away all the ugliness and inconsistencies and just kind of dumbness of the operating systems on various microcomputers at the time.

So let me explain why I'm talking about this. I know I mentioned yesterday, when I was talking about Rags to Riches. I mentioned, you know I've done, I've mentioned going on taking previous uh videos. So I kind of want to walk through what I did and I promise you there are fun anecdotes that have nothing to do with programming. So back when I was doing my gerps apps, I did them in super VGA and it was my first foray into it wasn't, you know, professional, but I wanted to learn how it worked. That's when I first started having to do the bank.

Switching, to remind you, is the way memory is mapped on a PC. You. Could write into PC memory and would appear on the screen. But the size of the memory was only 64k. But you needed a lot more than that for super VGA. So they invented Bank switching, so you'd write into that 64k memory. It would go up on the screen in a certain portion and then you could Bank switch and it would move where the memory on the PC was mapped to the screen. So you could That's the only way you could draw anywhere on the screen you wanted.

Bank switching was a pain. It required assembly code. It was different for every video card. I just really wanted it to not be something I had to think about every day.

So I wrote a little Library called grlib for graphics library and grlib, and encapsulated the bank switching and I used that for my gerps apps. So when I started doing Rags — to Riches I already had something like that and I started expanding it because for the gerps apps I think I used the mic, the windows Mouse, drawing routines. But on Rags to Riches we wanted our own Mouse so I had to draw it myself Mouse pointer on the screen. So this meant that when I went to go draw the mouse pointer it also had to understand Bank switching. And so I'm like, so I moved all the mouse routines into this Library. I had, well, that was for moving mouse and drawing it. Well, when you press the mouse, it and it would, you'd get a, you know, a click or double click.

I moved that in there as well. So that meant there was an input event Q, there was a. Whenever I would see one of these events, I throw in the queue so the game could. Then look at that queue and go: oh look, there's a mouse click here at this location. Or double click at this location.

Well, once I had that, it occurred to me: well, I should probably do keyboard events the same way. And for keyboard events it was like: you know, if you hold a key down, I wanted to know that. If you released it, I wanted to know that if the key was held down, so it started repeating the letter, I wanted to know that.

So I put all that in there and that all went into this event queue. So now this library is more than just video drawing Bank switching. It was mouse and keyboard abstraction and an event queue. And then that's when I realized I'm dos, which is what all this was written for. They only provided a timer that I did think did a tenth of.

A second, which was not enough to do animations. If you wanted a 30 frames per second game or 60 frames per second game, a tenth of a second timer is not enough. There was a millisecond timer, but it needed assembly. I didn't want ugly assembly in my beautiful C code. So again, that library was expanded and now there was a millisecond timer in there.

That's pretty much the state it was when I did Rags to Riches. It was a library that I just tried to hide things in. So my game code for Rags to Riches, what didn't look messy. When I started making engines after Rags shipped engine, one of which would become Fallout. I actually formalized all this. I took all those different abstractions and I smooshed them together in one Library called Ganahl.

Gnw — it stood for ganas, not Windows. Yes, it was front-end recursive, because that's how programmer humor rolls. I was really excited about ganoa because suddenly, once I had everything in there and you can always by itself compiling it — it had all the Dos stuff in there. My code looked very clean and operating system independent to test this.

Uh, Krista Salvo, the guy who stayed up all night with me while we were doing — well, I was coding rags to riches and he was helping me. He said I'll do a Mac version or test your theory. He took ganah home over one weekend, came back in with pretty much ninety percent of gnaw Mac I think. I remember color cycling wasn't working because Max handled color palettes differently, but most of it was. And we took that Mackinaw and we recompiled what was then the very early Fallout code to run on a Mac and it worked. We had Fallout running on a Mac like that.

Chris Jones later took The Gnome code and made a Windows version of it so we could run on Windows 95. And he did that in a few weeks, which meant we now had Fallout running on Mac and windows and dos. And I don't say it was free, but it was a lot easier to make those extra ones than what other people had dealt with in the past. So I started sharing and all with other teams. I know the Star Trek team used it, Max, uh, the mecca, mechanized armored exploration game. There are several of the Sim game: simant, sim Earth, SimCity. We were making SimCity 2000 and those all used them.

It was interesting because I had regular meetings with the executive producer and he told me not to waste my time because no one reused software and I said: well, you've already got. Five or six projects here that are using it and are dependent on my library, so I'm gonna keep doing it now a lot of funny things happened about um, um, but one of the funniest ones was — I think it was marketing — someone decided we should have a Windows 95 sticker on the box for Fallout. I know I've told this story in the GDC — talk. So we submitted it and I was like this is gonna pass easy because we are completely Windows 95 — in fact we're generic Windows compliant. So I was shocked when it came back unapproved and I read through the report and the reason for the unapproval was: it ran on Windows NT.

Like what does that have to do with anything. So I remember talking. I called the uh testing place and I talked to someone and she told me: yes, you're being you're disqualified from the Windows 95 logo or sticker or whatever it was on the front of the box, because you are supposed to degrade gracefully on Windows NT to get that logo. You have to degrade gracefully on Windows and T. And I said we degrade the most gracefully of all. We run flawlessly.

She said nope, that's not what we mean. It's not supposed to work. I was like why would you want it not to work? Because if you want the logo you have to make it not work. And I was like I don't really care about the logo, so oh well. So I was just prepared to Let It Go. But someone — and I don't remember who, someone in interplay was like no, we're getting that logo. So I didn't want to put anything in the game that would go.

Like your windows and T don't work. So I asked Chris. Jones to put that code in the installer. So if you're attempted to install Fallout on Windows NT it would go: nope, that's an invalid Target operating system.

Here's where it got funny. My experience writing critical error handlers on stonekeep had shown me that there were some CD-ROMs out there that were terrible. They would just not read data, or they'd sometimes read it, and sometimes not, especially if near the edges — the outer edge or the inner edge of the CD or the outer rim or the area near the spindle. Sometimes it wouldn't read it correctly, so you'd have to read it multiple times and I had that code in Fallout. But I realized that if people ever had trouble during installation with data reading, it would be a lot easier if there was some method of just doing it by hand. So there was a way of installing Fallout by bypassing the installer, by just taking the DAT file and copying it by hand to your hard drive and then copying over the executable for dos or Windows or Mac, whatever you're going to run, and just run that, and that would work.

Turns out, we could do that. We suggested that to people for NT. We're like: oh, is the installer not working for you? Just copy it by hand, it'll work. So we got the logo. People with winning T had an alternative way of installing it. Everybody was happy. The irony was Windows 95 got phased out and all the windows starting with Windows 2000 going forward were all Windows NT based, so the installer wouldn't work for them.

Luckily you could just hand copy it and Fallout continues to be run to this day. Later, when I was running my own company at Troika, I learned my lesson and I remember I left all the code behind. I rewrote an entire Library called TIG, which stood for TIG, isn't Ganahl. So Not only was it forward and back for front letter and back letter, recursive, but TIG did a lot more than what Ganahl did. TIG handled bit debts any bit depth you wanted. So you could do 640, 40, 24 bit, 32-bit color. It handled memory. You could have it handle memory for you, or you could say, hey, I've made my own buffers. Here they are for my windows. It just did a lot more stuff. Um, side note: at one point when interplay thought I had stolen code, I invited them over. Fergus came over with a programmer and they went through all my TIG code and the pro I still remember the programmer looked at Ferg and said: this is totally brand new, this isn't anything from Ganahl, in fact it's better. I kind of wish we could do some of this stuff. Funny time, but here's the thing I just want to throw out there because of taking all.

It's very easy to Port games like Fallout and Arcanum because they're not operating system dependent. I was curious about this a few months ago. So I took Arcanum because I have the source code and I recompiled it on a modern C compiler — compiler - compiler for Windows 10 and whatever version of DirectX we're up to now and it works. I have Arcanum running on Windows 10 as a native app. If I can do that to Arcanum, anybody can do that to Fallout, because fallout's based on Ganahl you make, you bring all up to modern spec and you should be able to recompile the whole thing for whatever operating system you want: Windows 11, Windows 12, whatever's coming down the pipe. That's why I made that, because I didn't want to have to deal with operating systems, and they're being upgraded, so I'm hoping something like that happens. I'm not going to do it, but my experiment with Arcanum proves that it's possible. So, going forward, whenever I talk about Fallout or Rags to Riches or Arcanum or Temple, you're going to hear me throw out the words Ganahl and Tig. That's what I'm talking about and that's my programming video for a while.
