+++
title = "Pacifism In Games"
date = "2023-12-15"
id = "I5-TCLLR2kQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Player Choice"]
summary = "I talk about pacifism in games and how I supported it with minimal extra development costs."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about pacifism in games.

This comes from a question from am Brandt 7422, who asks: I wonder what you think about pacifist play Styles and how much implementing one costs on development time. So again, T DW. I love PL pacifist playthroughs and they shouldn't take much extra work, if any at all, to support.

Uh, but before I dive into this, though, two quick things. Uh, YouTube changed the algorithm again, so I have almost no control over ads anymore. You may have heard about this, but I can't control if they're at the beginning or the end or if they're skippable. The only thing I can control is whether or not I want them to be in the middle of the video, and I've turned that off, and that is the one control I still have, sorry.

The other thing is it's so dark that I ordered some lights to put in my bookcase. They should be here today or tomorrow, so let's hope. The next video is brighter. Back to pacifism. Um, I think it should be obvious. I love pacifism playthroughs. You could play Fallout that way. It was accidental in Fallout somebody — we designed the game and done the main quest and all that — and at one point I believe someone in QA went: you know, you can play without killing anybody. And I was like really, and it turned out it was a side effect of um.

I think most of the dialogue playthroughs didn't result in anyone dying. Caveat: you didn't kill anyone, if the master blew up a bomb or if, while stealthing around, a bomb went off, that that can't be blamed on you, right, um? So once we knew that was happening, we kind of supported it and I think I mentioned this.

There was someone else who played the game um who tried to kill everybody and he was really upset that there seemed to be people marked as unkillable, like the overseer, which is why we even threw in being able to kill him at the end — spoiler after Fallout. Pacifism was something that went into the design. We thought about it was a thoughtful design feature in my subsequent games, at least in the games that I could do it — um games where I was using someone else's IP like you know, Temple of Elemental Evil or vampire Bloodlines. We couldn't always control whether or not a pacifist playthrough is possible, but in the games I made myself that were my IP, I wanted pacifism to be possible. So just so you know, pacifism. There's nothing special about pacifism in that sense. It's I like all kinds of player driven character activity where you're doing something, you're behaving a certain way because you want to, not because the game's making you. Not because it's optimal, but because you've decided that's part of your character.

Um and my video. A few weeks ago I was talking about all my brother's Miniatures and the associated characters. I remember those characters 44 years later because they are so memorable.

They he played like he played his Illusionist in a way that was not the best for an Illusionist to announce. I'm an Illusionist and now I'm C, casting an illusion — but I remember that character. He was very distinct and he was very successful. That's, a good character.

Um, most people think the only way to measure — measure - measure your the reward in an RPG is how high your character got levelwise, or you know how many quests you completed wrong. It's how much fun you're having and how memorable that character is. Those are far, better rewards, and 44 years later, I remember my brother's characters when I played started playing wow in 2005, within a year or two, I remember a friend of mine, Miriam. She played a mage who was a vegan octogenarian and I remember this character. It has been 20 years and I remember her character because, she was vegan, she wouldn't eat any animal products and she was a maid.

She could summon a lot of things. She could summon milk, but she wouldn't drink it. She could summon cheese, but she wouldn't eat it. She would only drink water.

Um, for some spells, it said: summons a banquet. I think she let herself eat from it. She said, hey, okay, I'm eating from this, but I'm sure there's fruits and vegetables on here.

Um, the octogenarian part. The only place I remember that coming into play was she turned run off on. Her character walked everywhere, so she was an 80s something year old Mage who was vegan. That was a very distinctive set of layers on top of a standard mage character and something I remember. Um, I had a character too, a little gnome called nugget, and when he got high enough level his last name became o justice. So he was nugget o Justice and his tagline was: he Avenged those who couldn't avenge themselves and basically he got really excited when there was a quest that you know, some poor farmer was being put upon or someone stole money or whatever, and he's like: yes, this is what we're going to do. And he was relatively, um, neutral about Quest. Like we're going to go, you know, go into some dungeon and collect treasure. But if there was a bad guy in the dungeon and he had stolen that treasure or you know he was doing bad things like raising the dead, nugo Justice was going to take care of it I like stuff like that.

To me, pacifism is that it is a player being feeling so strongly about not killing someone, even in a game, that he makes that part of his character's background and story and behavior and that makes the games harder to play. Um, when you play a pacifist, if you're playing a game that gives you experience for killing, you're not going to get that XP. It's one of the many reasons I like XP just coming from quests, because that way the game isn't judging you on how you solved the quest, just that you did it. And I also love that.

People sometimes want to experience the storyline in an RPG and you know They want to play through all the stories and meet all the characters and see the outcomes and see the effects on people, but they don't necessarily want to. Do all the combat. I had a friend who was a level designer and he primarily played games to see the story and to see the levels and he would often turn difficulty, especially combat difficulty, down to easy so he could do that. What I love about pacifism is that's a way — if the game provides It's a way to do that without having to turn any game difficulty down to low. You can play it. The game provides a way of doing it I love that.

So let's talk about how you would put that into your game's design. I do not think the development time has to be increased if you plan for pacifism in advance. My games on all the main story quests had a rule that those quests had to be: you could fight your way through, sneak your way through or talk your way through. Yes, sometimes the talk. Path ended up with people fighting among themselves or someone fighting for you or doing something violent. And yes, sometimes the sneak one was going in, uh, hacking into a computer and having it blow up an engine, or, you know, sneaking into a bomb and activating it. So, yes, that was you being violent, even if it's by proxy. But there were lots of options that didn't have that, where you could just not even interact with people. You sneak in, you get what you want, you leave. So if your game has options like that, you just need to make sure that in any Quest that has a, if the sneak option is violent, the talk one isn't. The talk one's violent, the sneak one isn't, and usually the talk ones aren't violent, so you usually can get away with that. So if what you have to say is to be a pacifist character, you maybe have to put some points in talking. I don't think that's out of the question.

To tell players we support pacifism, but you're going to have to have good speech skills. So because I already had those stealth and dialogue paths already planned for my games, it's not like they increase our development time. We were already going to do it. So I believe the only place it really came into planning once we realized we wanted pass F paths is when you had placed encounters that required combat. That would violate my rule if there was no way around them, if it funneled you into this thing and you had to fight this guy um, at the end of The Outer Worlds.

That's why I was always against bosses. I didn't really like the robot, but you could, with Advanced planning, get the robot heavily reduced and get the drones. To fight for you and get and your companions to fight and you could actually not do anything and you could defeat the robot. Plus, it was a robot, so I'm not sure that counted on many people's pacifism playthroughs. I mean, if you were allowed to shoot a gun turret, the robots in The Outer Worlds were not sentient. You should be allowed to kill them.

Now all bets are off on side quests. Like I've said, side quest didn't have to have all three playthroughs, which meant you might have a side quest that only has a combat solution. Pacifists aren't going to do that, but side quests are optional, so the game is completable with pacifism and I feel like it supports that playthrough. Now, the one thing I said placed encounters, uh, and side quests. One thing that isn't optional or avoidable are Random Encounters. However, you can do things to make Random.

Encounters — po? Um — handleable in a pacifist playthrough. First of all, they could be escapable.

There could be a perk saying you can opt out of Random Encounters in the world map. You know, you're so good at tracking and being an Outdoorsman that you can see something coming and just avoid it. In Fallout, we let you run from every encounter so they could be shooting at you, but once you reach the? Uh, in the transition grid, you're taken out of the map even if you're in combat. So they're escapable. Other things are perks that, like make hostile creatures not hostile, especially animals, um, or perks that let you have dialogue with hostile people and potentially make them back down, even if you have to pay them money. So those are all ways that Random Encounters could be handleable by pacifist.

Yeah, you may have to run away. Yeah, you may. Have to pay, money, but that's kind of the balance between if you don't want to kill anyone, that's what you have to do. So I think with those kind of rules in place, almost any RPG could be made to support pacifist playthroughs. Not sure about MMO RPGs especially.

I'm not sure what it says ethically about you being in a party and everyone else is fighting things and you're not. Although I pretty much described healers, especially in raids, they pretty much just keep everybody buffed and healed and they're not actually directly damaging the boss. So there are even things like that. But I think most games, most RPGs, if they're rich enough, can easily support pastor's playthroughs, and I like that mine did. So am Brandt 7422. I hope that answers your question.
