+++
title = "Game Production Stages"
date = "2023-11-10"
id = "IADSh_P05As"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Production", "Game Production", "Prototype"]
summary = "I talk about all of the stages a game's production goes through, including the names of those stages and what their purposes are."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about game production stages.

This is actually an answer to a question I got from Charlie K 5964, who asks, as a follow-up to the ideas video, what should go into the Prototype. Should it be a minimum viable product or should it things like art be included? Now, that's a really good question, but couple things, um, different companies call different things a prototype. So what I thought I'd do is walk through the stages that my games have gone through and I'll tell you the names I give them.

Just bear in mind that some companies will call these different things also. It turns out — and this isn't just for Charlie Kay's question, but it's true it's a really good question — that I'm surprised it never occurred to me to do a video on. This is an example of — I've just been using these terms for decades. I don't even think about them — the idea that, um, somebody wouldn't know like what a vertical or horizontal slice.

Was, or a beautiful corner. I have to be reminded that, even though everybody I talk to at work always seems to know what all these terms are, once you go outside the business, people are like beautiful corner. So let me go through them in order. This is roughly the stages that a produ, a game production, will go through. So probably the first thing that gets made — and I'm not going to talk about design docks and art meetings and all — I'm talking about things that we actually make with the engine, um, that other people in the development team will use. So the first things that are probably made are test rooms. These are individual levels, stages, rooms, whatever you want to call them — that are designed to test a feature in isolation, so they tend to be broken up into to different kinds of test rooms. A combat test room may have. A single creature, a couple creatures, a group of creatures, a boss, a creature that does a particular kind of attack, like a, breath weapon or something. There's usually a table or chest filled with different weapons. In case you don't know what the cheat codes are for getting them, you can just go grab one. Some of the creatures are set to fight back, some aren't.

Sometimes there's a big button on the wall, you know press to turn off. You know creature AI, so you can just turn it off and you can just test a weapon, test a, combat maneuver you're putting in without actually being attacked back by the creature. Similarly, there's stealth test rooms that have places that have locks to pick of different difficulties, computers to hack, traps to disarm guards to sneak by. You know vents, or what we call them in out of Worlds Crouch. Holes, things to test like this is how you know I can go into these things and avoid combat. This is test, stealth, detection, things like that. There's a dialogue test room that does things everything from: here's how close you have to get to someone before dialogue activates. Here's what a dialogue looks like. You know what the NPC camera is like. Here's what dialogue between multiple NPC's would be like. Here's what dialogue that includes companions would be like. Um, here's an example of events that can break a dialogue, like you might have a room you can go into where you start talking to someone and then combat breaks out, and finally there's exploration test rooms. These are rooms that test things like jumping and crouching. This is how high I can jump, this is how low I can Crouch and still go under things again.

These are put in, so that anyone on the team can go in and go. Oh, this is the minimum height. Something can be that I can still get under it. This is the maximum height. Something can be that I can jump up to it, something we can go to and look at. So when you're may, maybe a level designer is making a brand new level and he wants to know what those bounds are.

The next thing that's made — to answer Charlie K's question directly — is a prototype, is something prototype? A prototype is something that's put together to test all features together.

Um, it's playable game, but it's not final art. In fact, sometimes the Prototype might even be gray box, where you know it's. You're just in these gray rooms, you're, it's there to test maybe.

Oh, this is how one of our levels may be put together: the pacing of combat traps, guards. Dialogues — it's an example of this — is what the game will feel like to play, but it won't look like this. Conversely, around the time of a prototype — usually after, but very rarely I've seen it done at the same time or before you're — make something called a beautiful Corner is usually done to show the team or the publisher This is what the game is going to look like when we ship. It's also a test to make sure that the artists are capable of creating the art, the in-game art that looks like what the concept art was like.

A beautiful corner is very small area. Um, it's usually not playable and if, it is playable, you just can walk around it. The, player instantiates and can just walk. If it's not playable, then it's usually a camera that you just move through the area. It's a small section and the reason it's often called a beautiful corner is if you turn around 180° and look behind you can see: oh, it's not the art isn't, doesn't, isn't behind me, it's just in front of me. The beautiful corner for The Outer Worlds was a water treatment plant. You could walk among uh the equipment. You could look out windows.

A ship flew by uh, there was a person uh near the top that was just standing there. You could actually see. This is what the game would look like when it shipped. Then there are two other things that are made later: uh, off a year or two in development, or I should say 50 to 50%, maybe halfway, 2third of the way through development. They're the two slices I've heard vertical slice used a lot. A vertical slice is you take one area to completion, it has virtually every feature that's going to be.

In the shipped game. Virtually all the art will be finished. Um, the purpose of a vertical slice is to show exactly what the game will be like. It'll look like this, it'll play like This is the game, now, when I say virtually, it's because, it's one area, there may be some things you can't show, like if it's a town, maybe you can't show harvesting resources, if it's an outdoor area, maybe you can't show fast travel to another location because that just isn't there. Um, the vertical slice for The Outer Worlds was Roseway, which had several instances in it: um, a town and the ship, but it didn't include crafting, because the crafting table, the crafting station, was on the ship and we didn't let you go in the ship because of that. It also didn't include fast travel to another level. It also didn't let you switch your companions. You started with two companion because you couldn't get back in the ship. You couldn't switch them. That was all done deliberately because those features weren't available yet. We only had two companions done, but everything else about that level was done to completion, including vo for the companions.

Sometimes that something that would be left out of vertical slice. We actually did it, so, Roseway, actually we had that over a year before we shipped. We actually had a playable level and we said: look, this is what the game's going to be like. That was very cool because it got by that point. Everybody — publisher, development team, everybody should be on the same page because you can always go: look at the vertical slice. The whole game's going to be like that.

Another one which I hadn't heard of a lot. I don't know if I came up with this. Term and I don't remember hearing it where, before I started using it, was a horizontal slice — is the a complete orthogonal idea to the vertical slice. A horizontal slice is all the areas in the game are playable, but they're not completed. They're not to final completion. They may be — some of them may be gray boxed, um, some of them may not have all of the content in that they're going to have, but they're. They're roughly playable, and the reason for this and the reason you do a horizontal slice is several reasons.

One: you want to figure out how all these levels are connected. You may discover that you have a level and you didn't think about how the player was going to get there. He can't walk there because it's physically disconnected. O I guess we need to put a landing pad here, because the only way they're going to get there is with the ship. Um, sometimes you can't get to a map unless you get a quest for the map to that takes you there. Those are things we have to figure out. It's like, well, this Quest has to be something everybody can get. It can't be a um side quest that we only support Limited, uh, player character types.

For the other thing you do with horizontal slice is you figure out play time. You can figure out the rough play time of your game once you have the horizontal SLS, because you have all the levels. They're roughly playable. They've got most but not all of their content. So if you put together a horizontal slice and you can play it in 20 hours, you're pretty sure your game isn't going to be less than 20 hours because you're going to be putting even more content in. It just gives you a good overall idea of: did we make a 20 hour game, a 40 hour game, an 80 hour game and then finally, especially for the G kind of games I make, which are nonlinear, a horizontal slice lets you figure out ordering issues. It lets you figure out things like: oh, what happens if the player goes to this level? Before they go to this level, what happens if, as soon as getting the quest over here, they run over here instead? These are things you have to figure out. Are the? Are all the different play options available to the character?

Are they telegraphed? Is it? Is the player at least warned? This is a tough level to go to.

Are there NPCs that don't respond correctly in their dialogue to the player having already gone to some other place out of order? Something we really tried to do in all of. Our games is not make any assumption that the player had done something or hadn't done something before talking to an NPC.

The horizontal slice — let you work out a work out a lot of that, by the way. The horizontal slice eventually turns into the game as you fill it with more and more content. Eventually you stop calling it the horizontal slice and it becomes the game.

The next stage is the alpha stage. Um, I've heard this called different things at different companies, but the alpha stage is when all the areas are in. They're all playable. All the contents in, unlike the horizontal slice, all the contents in. But the alpha may still be unbalanced. It may be well, probably is buggy and it may be missing small, amounts of final content, like maybe all the crafting stations are in and all the correct locations, but maybe not every recipe has. Been finished, or maybe all the recipes are in but some of the resources you're supposed to get, that you're supposed to harvest, they haven't finished putting down where all of those are yet. So maybe you're supposed to mine a certain ore and all the places where you can mine that ore aren't completed yet, but at least one is. So we consider this an alpha because you can test it, figure out all the things a player potentially can do. The beta is the next and final stage before shipping. The beta is when all the content's in. There's no more. You're not going to say we're going to add any more th, any more content side content, tasks, achievements, nothing, it's all in.

Beta is the time where you fix bugs, do any final balancing, tweaks to formulas for combat or vendor prices, and this is where optimization is done. You can optimize. A little in the earlier stages, especially if it's affecting development, like some level is, has a frame rate that's so bad you can't even test it. But this is the stage, the beta stage, where most of the optimization should happen. I've already talked about the dangers of early optimization, so this is why you should have a beta stage to let the programmers and artists — artists are often responsible for optimization too when they put in too many big textures or models with too many polygons in them.

And then that's the last stage until the final stage, final ship. That's when the game goes out. People are playing it.

Hallelujah, you're done right. No patches. You may do official and unofficial patches. Patches can fix bugs, patches can balance the game. Patches can put in a little extra content that maybe you missed, like maybe there's a um, some voiceover missing from. NPC, and you fix all that stuff in patches and now you're done.

Right, wait, there's one more thing. There's DLC, downloadable content. DLC is anything from extra packs that you give, like cosmetic packs that people can buy. It's like: oh look, there's new armor, there's new hats, there's new crafting recipes, or could be full-on content, um, DLC which has new levels, new storyline, new Ventures you can do. The level cap may be increased, new perks are added, new skills are added, skills have their cap increased. DLC does all of that. I don't consider that a patch.

Um, that's all the DLC, that. That basically makes more content for the game. Now sometimes things get blurred and sometimes DLCs seem like sequels, um, and sequels sometimes seem like expensive DLCs. But that's roughly all the stages that a game goes through. So just to recap: test rooms, prototype, beautiful Corner, vertical. Slice, horizontal slice, Alpha Beta, ship patch, DLC — nine stages. I think that answered Charlie qu, Charlie K's question and maybe a few other questions, so hope you liked it.
