+++
title = "What Is Fun?"
date = "2024-03-25"
id = "IhF-8-5S5OE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design", "Balance"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fun."
references = ["TshXDFgfiTg", "TiL2wa66wxs", "OoJ6CDDfYiU", "jWEuSV_nbfA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about fun.

I've already done a video, and I'll link it below, about balancing fun and realism in games, but I've got a lot of fun oriented questions. People want to know what I think about fun versus balance, what I think about games that force you to go, what the designer considers to be the F path, or just what is fun, Define fun. I'm going to take a stab at it same way I took a stab at def: finding what an RPG is. Let's see how this goes, first of all, let's talk about fun versus balance. I don't think anybody's going to be surprised that I prefer fun overbalance in any of my games, and you can even see some of my games were really unbalanced.

Sometimes certain skills or certain classes you could take were just a lot easier than others. I don't think anybody thinks the naratu is easy to play in Bloodlines. Um, a lot of people think the Mages are much easier than Gunslingers in Arcanum um.

But notice that doesn't talk about whether or not it's fun. It's talking about whether it's easy, which gets in, opens another can of worms about skills and what people think is easy versus what other people don't think is easy. But let's just look at balance for a second. I think balance is really, really important if you're making a multiplayer game, whether it's PVP or not, if a bunch of people are playing together, if it's PVE — player versus environment — it's really not fun. If one of the character, one of the player characters, can have a lot more fun than another one because their SK, either because their skills are more broadly useful, or they picked a class that's required and everybody wants them, or any number of reasons. And if it's PVP, balance is probably the most important thing, because if you have players attacking players and you have one class that can Trump every class, or you have one skill that is unblockable and beats everyone else, everyone's just going to take that class or buy that skill and then that kind of defeats your whole purpose of having a bunch of different classes and skills. So I do think balance is important in multiplayer, but in single player not so much. Um, I know people will go but that will leave. People will find ways to play op — okay, that's fun and people go. Well there find ways of mini maxing their characters — great if you found some way of putting together a really unusual character that has a huge damage output or barely can take damage or can kill things in one hit — great. Similarly, if you make a really cool — we used to call them glass cannons — where you make a character that has a high damage output but if it takes one hit they're dead.

Some people like those. It's a challenge. It's like putting your game on high difficulty or Iron Man mode, knowing that you're playing a character that has this huge restriction. I used to play in gerps — um, they used to call him Johnny one spells. It was a, mage who put all of his points into just one spell. So maybe you could cast flame jet or maybe you could cast you know, ice, an ice explosion spell or something. But you put all your points into it, which meant you were really really good at casting it. You, never missed, it always went off. It didn't cost a lot of Mana, ET, you cast it quickly, etc.

It's all great until you walk, if, say, you pick flame jet, it's great until you run into a fire Elemental that doesn't take. Any damage from fire, well, guess what? That, Johnny, one spell is useless, so I get why people want to talk about fun and balance, but if it's a single player game — I don't really want to dictate to that player what fun is. I don't want to tell them how to play the game. That's the whole point of me talking about player agency and player choice and consequence. I'd instead go have fun playing the game. And half of playing the game is not just exploring the world but is exploring the mechanics. And if you find things in the mechanics that you find especially fun, great. Um, now let's talk about forcing the fun way. Um, people were talking about games that the designer obviously thought a certain way was the best way or the fun way to play, and they make you play that way, I think if you watch.

Any of my videos you're going to know I hate that. I do not like forcing the player to play anyway. That's why I allow people to kill everyone without even talking to them. It's why I try to do pacifist playthroughs. It's why I make sure that, no matter what skills or classes you buy, your character can still finish the game.

May not be e easy, but for all I know, you find some unusual way to be fun. So who am I to tell you: no, play this way. This is the only fun, if you played my temple of Elemental Evil game, you know that when you end the game there's a bunch of different things you can do at the end.

Did you kill zck Moy, the queen of fungi? Maybe maybe you killed her because you were good. Maybe you killed her because you were evil, but uh, maybe you. Were evil and you joined her, maybe she was wrecking you in the final combat and she said: join me or die and you're like, okay, I'll join, why not? That's what an evil group might do. Or maybe you were so evil and you were crushing her that maybe she decides to give in to you. She surrendered to you: sure, be your vassel, why not?

That sounds like fun. It's probably really unbalanced because if we had a, sequel Temple of mental evil, and you had zugg point as a party member, okay, that's going to be a little unbalanced, but it was a fun way to end the game. I thought it was great, similarly, I did a video on Quest markers. Some of you hate Quest markers. You're like: I hate it I don't want them in my game. It takes away all the joy. You play the HUD, you play.

The UI, I get It's a totally reasonable thing, then some of you requireed them. You're like: look, I'm not, I don't, I don't have time, I work a full-time job, I have kids. I sometimes won't play the game for a month at a stretch. I need a quest marker to tell me where to go. If you don't provide them, I move on to the next game.

Totally reasonable now. I thought a reasonable compromise was to make them an option. And then many of you pointed out — and I think it was totally good thing to point out — that if you make it an option it's harder to play test a game. I agree, because now you have to play testers have to play it with the quest markers on and the other half to play them with them off, just to make sure everything's still doable. But it also means me that the quest should be solvable without Quest markers, meaning the quest Giver tells you enough information that you could go figure out how to do the quest, and that that stuff, that information, is put in your Journal so that if you come back to it the next day or the next week or the next month, you still have that information. Some games get around that by just recording every dialogue you ever have, and so there's a tab in your Journal called previous dialogues, and you can just SC scroll through transcripts. That's a great way too, especially if it has search in it I prefer, though, it to be linked directly to the quest in the quest log. We kind of did that in Arcanum. So to me, that is about the only way to achieve consensus is to have optional Quest markers and really well defined quests, so you don't. Need them, but if you want them, they're there, because any other decision is you telling the player?

Here's how you are going to have fun. Now that probably brings me around to what's fun. What is fun?

I struggled with this and I just did the one about. You know the video about how to define an RPG, but I struggled with fun. It's like a lot of things in life. It's really hard to Define fun. The same way, it's hard to Define happy. Um, a lot of kids are happy, but if you ask them why they're happy, or even that they are happy, they don't know. They just are happy, similarly, you're playing a game and it's fun, and if someone says: why is it fun? Define them why it's fun. I don't know it's fun, it's. I often fall back on that famous definition of porn, which is: I can't.

Define it, but I know it when I see it. If you haven't heard this here, like Tim Story Time, Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart said a the following line about obscenity: in a case he had to look at in 1964 about a theater showing a movie that the local officials thought was pornography and they stopped him under Ohio's obscenity law. And here's what Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart said, quote: I shall not today attempt further to define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description, and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so, but I know it when I see it.

I'm the same way about fun. I've played a ton of games. I know what fun is. I can tell when a game is fun. I can tell when a game isn't fun, but I probably can't to find it I certainly can't. Give a really shorthand description of fun in a way that hundreds or not thousands of you could not rip apart and come up with counter examples, so I'm not going to try to do that. But what I will say is this: ultimately, whatever the game director or lead designer thinks is fun, that's what's fun in that game. The reason I like emergent play — and I'll link that below — is sometimes fun is somewhere no one thought of. It's at an intersection of a bunch of roles and fun comes out of it. So while ultimately I think the game director is the person responsible for fun. So in other words, they take credit if you think you have the, if you think a game is fun, and spread it among the team, but they be responsible and take the blame if you don't think it's fun. Ultimately, I think whatever director thinks it's. Fun is what's fun. Probably not the answer you wanted. I think it's the best answer I can give, so that's fun.
