+++
title = "Game Trailers"
date = "2025-10-17"
id = "iHzT4_x1-KU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Marketing"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about game trailers."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about game trailers.

I've never talked about this and I have a caveat to give, but I will say this at the beginning: Game trailers are easy to make, but it's really hard to make a good one. I'll get into that, but this came from a question from viewer KMG9763 — KMG9763 - KMG9763, who asked: "Any tips on how to make a good game trailer? I feel like modern game trailers are either so artificial that they become boring and sterile, or so random that I can't really tell what the game is about. Is it good to make multiple trailers — one for lore, one for gameplay, etc. Or should you make one big trailer and try to fit it all in? I'm from a time when games were advertised on TV at Me too. And I remember the first time I saw a game trailer as a preview on a DVD movie and I had never felt so invested in a game before.

That's cool. Thank you, KMG9763.. I remember when the entire source of uh game advertisement for me was an ad in a game magazine. That was it that was the only time you ever saw anything there. You know, a movie on an internet, a trailer?

Impossible. Anyway, let me give a caveat before I start. And this may be a little Tim Kane rant, but you know what? I think this is going to show up on a Friday, so cut me some slack. I have been involved in the trailers for all the games I was on, where I was either the project lead or the game director. Uh, for other games I'm. I either wasn't involved much in the trailer or they. Somebody may have come and asked me something like: "Hey, we're having a trailer meeting next week. Any suggestions on what we should include". Usually, though, if I was a project lead or the game director, I was in those meetings about game trailers where I would say, "Hey, here are some things I think we should put in there".

Um, but I've never actually made a trailer. And what I mean by that is I've never storyboarded a trailer. I've never done video clips and said, "This is roughly how I want the trailer to be laid out". I've never sat in front of a video editor and made a trailer. We always used sometimes in-house production, more often out of house production. There's a lot of places out there that can make you really good trailers.

There was one time on The Outer Worlds where I started to make one. It was for internal use, and I had started to make one. And I came in the next morning and one of our producers, Lauren, had made. This amazing, game trailer, Made mine look like something. A 5-year-old would make, and she showed it to me and I'm like "That's incredible. we're just going to use this one". I said, "How did you do that" And she was like "I'm a film studies major". I'm like "Wow". It would be like I'm exaggerating a little what it mean, like if you, know, met um Salvador Dolly and I'm like this is an incredible picture and he goes.

Well, I do like the doodle. I mean what he put together looked as professional as anything we've ever bought. It was that good, Um, so I'm not here to say I've made game trailers. Learn from what I've done, but I have been in meetings about trailers and talking to the people who are going to make them, about what I want to put in them, and then I've seen the results And the reason I want to give this caveat. I've.

Seen too many people in this game business talk about games they made, when really they're talking about games that have their names in the credits. They didn't make that game at all. They didn't make that game, any more than ordering a meal in a restaurant means you made that meal.

So this is my advice on how the best trailers for my games were made by other people. Let me now talk about why I think game trailers are so hard to make. It's one thing to show really cool graphics and combat and explosions — You know it's woo wee, That's awesome And yeah, that captures people's attention and you should have excitement in your game trailer. But the big question I've always had is: how do you show depth? How do you show: hey, this is a call back to an event that happened earlier in the game and the player will be heavily invested. How do you show that in a trailer.

How do you show really fun and diverse conversation options? How do you show a really good, UI? How do you show multiple quest solutions?

How do you show nonlinearity, because no one wants to watch those in a game trailer. And some of those things are almost impossible if you have to squeeze them into a short trailer. And I'll talk about how you will have to make different length trailers. So here are the thing that I think helps. These are the elements that go in to a good trailer.

First of all, show and don't tell. You don't have a lot of time. You are using a visual medium. Show something, Don't tell, if you have a really cool weapon, show it. If you have a funny character, show him or her saying something funny. If you have companions, show them. Show them helping you in combat. Show them you know getting a lock picked open. Show them jumping across somewhere and unlocking a gate so you can do it. Whatever they do, that's fun and cool in the game. Show it. Don't just say you have a lot of companions and they're there to be really cool. Now there are a few elements that I think are almost impossible to show, like nonlinearity. These are things you can tell quickly at the end where you can have somebody go: "Plus, our game is nonlinear, Multiple, something that makes it exciting and shows that you have it so people can go.

Oh good, I, I was. I was worried this was going to be a linear game".

That's probably the only exception of this show. Don't tell rule. Another thing is: don't feel like you have to reveal everything in the trailer.

I've seen games. That have trailers that reveal the end boss and I'm like, why would you do That's supposed to be an exciting thing that you build up to and now you've just revealed it. And I think sometimes you will be pressured by your publisher or even the production house you're using to show things that you think you kind of want to hold back. But also don't let that pendulum too far and hold back on showing all your cool stuff because you're like: I don't want any of that revealed. Okay, you got to show some cool things And, like I said, I think my best trailers have been used. I've used a production house on The Outer Worlds. We used a company called Buddha Jones, and they were phenomenal And the reason they were — and this is something you can look for if you use Production House — is they came to us. We gave them the game, of course, and they played it.

One person at Jones played it a lot, um, because he had questions and I'm like you're playing the game. We also gave them video snippets of things that we thought were cool, but they came down once and spent like two hours. We were in the conference room talking because there were some things they were getting not hung up on, but they wanted deep dives and one of them was humor. The humor in The Outer Worlds was of a particular tone and they wanted to make sure they match that tone in the trailer, because it would be very easy to make, The Outer Worlds look slapstick or something like that, and they didn't want to do that. But I really appreciate that they did that, because when they started giving us back roughs for what the trailer would be, like, they were nailing our humor. I remember turning to Leonard and go: they get this. We were super worried about it but they got it. And that's one reason. I mean you got to use a production house but you got to make sure they're a good production house.

Um, one of the things KMG asked about was: "Should you make one big trailer" And I'm like "No, don't, try to make one big trailer". That's the one trailer to rule them all and trying to show off everything. You have multiple options of when, what kind of trailer to make and where it will be shown. So I'm saying right now, don't make a lore one, Don't make a gameplay one.

First of all, start thinking the different lengths you need. Commonly these come in 15 second, 30 second, a minute or a few minutes. And these are all to be used in. Different places. A 15-second one may be an ad somewhere. The 30-cond one I is because some U platforms where you're going to show a video have a limit, an upper limit of how long they can be. And then you probably want to save the one minute or the few minute one for very particular things like, um, if you're going to have a big reveal at a convention, or it's the big a at a convention, or it's the big announcement trailer and you want to just show all — look at all the stuff. We've got that one big trailer. That's fine, just be careful and don't make your trailer too long. I remember somebody told me once: if you can't show me your magic in a minute, you're not going to be able to show me in five minutes. So It's a good rule of thumb that if you have something, special in your game, you should be able to show it, and, fairly concisely.

And if you can't, then maybe that just isn't a feature that warrants being in a trailer. And all these trailers, by the way, serve different purposes. Uh, you may make a trailer just to let people you know the game exists and is being worked on. We've done that for trailers going "Guess what? You know?

We're working on The Outer Worlds too. We just want you to know it exists. We didn't show any gameplay, We just like, look, we're working on it. And because it had been a while, we wanted to let people know we're working on it. Then you may make a trailer because you want to show what the game is about. You know, oh, this is about being in this setting and this is roughly what. This is the kind of person you're going to. Be playing and this is what you're going to be doing. Then you make a trailer, so, hey, I know you're excited because you've seen those other trailers. Let me show you some really cool stuff you can do. And this is where explosions, maybe you have a weapon that does something really funky. Maybe you have a, player ability that does something fun and different that you haven't shown before, because you do have something fun and different in your game, right? You know I'm always talking about: do you have a hook? Is there something this one game is doing that other games don't do? Is it different?

This is where you will show that in your cool trailer, because people you've already made people know it exists and they're kind of excited about it. Now, give them reasons to really get hyped up about it And then later, when the, when the game is close to shipping, that's when you do a trailer that has the announcement date and maybe what platforms it'll be on. It's more informational. It's to basically remind people you know that game you were super excited about and I showed you why you should be super excited about it.

Here's when you can buy it and here's, maybe, where you can buy it and here's where it will be available and here's what platforms it'll come out on. That's the purpose of that video, and then, as if that's not enough, and you're like, "Uh Tim, you just told me I have to make lots of different length videos and for different purposes". There are different aspect ratios. You have to worry about Some of your videos, mo, probably most of your trailers are going to be horizontal, landscape or whatever, but occasionally you have to think about portrait ones, depending on the. Platform that's going to show your video.

And if that's not worse. Some of them are square, Some, as sometimes you have to worry about a square aspect ratio And some things that look good in horizontal, they don't look as good vertical or square. Because you needed the, peripheral stuff going on, you need you, it was fun to see someone's reaction there. Or you did an area of effect thing and you want to show all the people in the background being blown back by the explosion. Just doesn't work as well vertical as it would have horizontal. So think about what you're showing, what purpose you're showing it for and what format it's going to be, how, not only how long, but what aspect ratio.

What am I saying? What?

How can I wrap this all up after 11 minutes? Um, I've said this about games, and it's true for game. Trailers: They are as much art as science. You think you can work out exactly what you want to show, but you need that artistic, creative touch to it to give it that, that vibe that you want. There is no recipe here. There's just a lot of ingredients I've mentioned that you may want to put in your trailer. I really can't stress enough finding a good production house to work with, one that works well with you. And but just remember that production houses specialize in doing this. They do this for movies and TV shows and other games.

They kind of know what they're doing and they will ask you good questions. They'll ask you for footage, or they just get the game and they'll get the footage themselves and they know what shows well and what looks good and what makes people interested. At the very minimum, what you should do is study trailers for games that you liked and you like the game trailer. So I think both are that important.

If you just really like a game trailer but you didn't think the game was any good, don't use that trailer as a, as something you want to study. But study game trailers for, uh, games you liked and the and you liked the trailer. Note their length, the composition, what features they covered, what kind of tone they had, and those are things you can include in your own trailer.

Um, it's it. You can learn a lot by what other people in the industry are doing. So, anyway, I think that's all the advice I've got to give. And, KMG9763,, I hope that answered your question.
