+++
title = "Arcanum 2 System Extensions"
date = "2023-06-13"
id = "IPEe0s6fjdw"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Character Systems"]
summary = "I describe the extensions I had planned for Arcanum 2's system mechanics for use in Journey To The Center Of Arcanum."
references = []
+++

Hi. It's me, Tim. Today I wanted to talk about Arcanum 2..

Specifically the system mechanics extensions that I designed for it, because I was reading through them recently and I'm like, hey, these are pretty cool. I kind of wish we had done this. Just want to point out before I begin I do not own the rights to Arcanum. Those are owned by Activision Blizzard, so there's no need to ask if I'm working on an Arcanum 2 or can make an Arcanum to. I can't ask Activision Blizzard if you have any questions. So I was going through my design folder from Troika and I found one that was literally called Arcanum 2 system extensions.

Most of them were in skills, but they're also schematics and spells and backgrounds. Now, real quick, we were planning for Arcanum 2 to be the Journey to the Center of Arcanum. What's important about these system extensions? They were designed with the idea that you could keep playing the same character.

Meaning. You all probably already had a character. That was fairly high level, so most of my system extensions occurred at the top of the skill tree, the top of the spell tree schematics, except for backgrounds, but I'll talk about that at the end. So my skill extensions were the most extensive, the first extension I did was I added something I called skill specialization. This was independent of the training, um, the beginner, expert and master in specializations. You could only get that once you achieved Mastery. So once you have Mastery you could spend one character point and buy a specialization of a skill Each skill had tons of specializations.

I'm not going to go over all of them. I I was reading through this, I had at least four. A lot of them had five or six specializations per skill. I'll go over some to give you an example what I did: some of these specializations also had minimums of attributes or in sometimes other skills, so you couldn't always buy all of them. I'll give you an example. I do all of them, say, for Bo.

So there were four specializations for bow that you could buy once you hit a Mastery level. There was double damage, which required a strength of 12, and suddenly every arrow you fire will do double damage. There was Seeker, which you could get if you had a DEX of 20.. You can now shoot arrows around a corner, so if you clicked on somebody and it only required the arrow to make one change in its straight line path, you could still hit them. There was one called Marksman, which also had a DEX of 20, which would increase the critical hit chance for all of your conch shots. Finally, there was one called recover arrows that required you to have at least spent one point and have a repair of two skill. And what it did, is it? There was a chance that any Arrow you shot would be in the creature's inventory if you killed them. So I thought those were pretty cool.

Um, taunt had five new specializations, which included [Music], um, getting, I'm sorry. Dodge had five specifications included: taunt, which would make other nearby people try to attack you, or vade, which would make attackers actually go off to your other, increase the chance they were going to your another Target, which was interesting because those would work together, which meant if you were dodging someone, there was a good chance that either more people around them would try to attack you or they'd all go on to someone else. It was an interesting thing to do.

Melee had six of them. Um, which included everything from dual wield to doing knockbacks like the spell effect, um and stuns, but you would basically be able to get those automatically if you landed the blow. Throwing had a bunch of extra things, including — including - including similar to Bose — doing double damage and being able to throw around corners. We had a lot of thieving specializations for backstabbing, so a ninja backstab meant the NPC Target gets no chance to report the attack, so if you kill someone with your backstab, no one knows.

Um. Pickpocket had things that reduced penalties for taking someone's wielded weapon or wielded armor, so you could literally steal a sword out of someone's hand or steal the armor that they're wearing. Prowling had a bunch of stuff that, once you were prowling, you could do things like, um. Do an instant short range move like a mini teleport. While prowling you could. One of them was called camouflage, which meant if you were prowling in a tile that had foliage, you could. You were considered invisible when you were in there, so there's no chance of you being seen unless you did an attack or made a sound. Um, there was one. We caught human fly that only worked with the engine.

Sometimes we had facades in the game and this would work with any. Facades were things that would look like the. The crashed um blimp was a facade. It was a bunch of tiles that were made as one piece of art and they were laid down as one giant tile thing. What human fly that you do is you could click on any facade or wall segment and reappear at any tile that was connected to that facade or wall segment, so you could go up to one wall of. A building and then instantly go anywhere along the perimeter of that building. Or you could go up to facade like the craft splib and instantly appear anywhere around that blimp.

I thought that was pretty cool. Um, spot traps had a bunch that basically, let you one of them, let you pick up any trap. That was — oh wait, that was another one — um spot traps that you go over a trap without setting it off. Um, if you detected one trap, there was a chance all the traps in the area on screen would also light up.

Gambling, haggling, healing, persuasion — wow, all the tech skills got their own. Um, level six, uh, or, I'm sorry, uh — Mastery specializations. The one that really caught my eye was the um the tech One, reverse engineering, which is if you had an intelligence of 20 and at least one degree. And all the other in all the tech disciplines, you could learn a schematic by just finding an example of that item. So if you found an item in the game that you did not know, the schematic for just having that item, boom You Could reconstruct it, um, um.

So those are really cool and that added a lot of stuff because there were five to six, for all 16 skills. That added like another 80 points to spend things on. The next way, I extended the skills, what I added a training level past Master called Grand Master and that made let you do things that even the earlier training levels and all the specialization didn't do.

For example: the backstab. Grand Master turned all backstabs into critical successes. They didn't have a chance, they all were always a critical success.

Um, the uh, repair Grand. Master meant a repaired item never lost its maximum health.

You were just. It was immune. You were immune to that.

The Firearms Grand Master let you do a wield guns, so it was things like that that were really cool. But the Grand Master One not only took a character point and required Master training, but it also cost money and you had to do the Quest for the Grand Master training. There was no way to avoid it. Now, because of this, that added 16 new points that you could spend on skills. Once I did that to skills, I did it to all the Spells as well. So every College gained a level six spell, called a lost spell from the age of Legends, if you remember arcanum's lore. Magic waned and waxed and we were in a period where it was waning, so there were spells above level five that had been lost. In Journey to the Center of Arcanum you were going to find age of Legend spells and get powerful enough to cast them. So some examples — for that was: the conveyance College had an evacuate spell that teleported you and the entire party, all your companions, to a distant and defined safe location. Um, the force spell got something called Full Spectrum Aura, which lets you do what kurgan did, the boss at the end, which is surround himself with the shimmering feel that made him totally invulnerable to attack.

Of course, you can't attack either. It's basically a shell that nothing can go in and out of it, um.

One of my favorite was there was a mental. The mental College got Mass domination which, when you cast it, every NPC on screen and, within a certain range, even off screen, had to say versus magic. And if they failed, they all became your allies for a period of time and fought for you, and when it wore off they had no memory. So if they weren't hostile dude before, they're not hostile to you now. That was a prequel spell. Each one of these spells cost a point but also had a quest associated with it, which was really a quest to recover that spell it was. You had to go find you know tablets or you know a dead person that you could speak with, dad with, and they would teach you this age of Legend spell.

Um, also, I was making it so that any spell you could spend another point in it and it would make it better. In a predefined way. It would either do more damage, or the effect of it would last longer, or have a bigger area of effect. It was dependent on the spell, but that meant you could, if you had a spell you liked, like Fireball, you could make a better Fireball and then an even better Fireball. But spells had to be improved in order. So if you had a third level spell, you had to at least put an extra point in spells one and two before you could improve spell three.

This created a ton. This was over a hundred new points to spend just on spells. I did a very similar thing with tech schematics. I added a level eight schematic called your post-doctorate, and those are things like in chemistry.

It was creating Napalm, which was not just created an area with fire, but if they went through it they stayed on fire after they came out of it. Um, there was an electro Cannon which you could make from the electrical College which would make uh ranged. Weapons into a powerful electrical ranged weapons, shrapnel mines, adamantine plate — these are all examples of things.

Again, they cost a character point to buy and had a quest associated with them, and, like spells, I put in that you can improve earlier schematics so you could make a Molotov cocktail that did more damage, or maybe you made more of something for the same amount of ingredients. So that was pretty cool and again, you had to improve earlier schematics to improve it later on. That alone added over 70 new skill points to spend. So those were all the things you got that I added toward the end of the game. One thing I did which was still backwards, compatible with characters, was I divided all the backgrounds in the game into three groups: genetic, childhood and adult. Genetic backgrounds were things you're born with, childhood backgrounds or things that happened to you when you were small, child, pre-teen years and adulthood was anything that happened in your teen or early adulthood. So an example would be: that is, if you were The Offspring of a troll, that's a genetic background. If you were raised by monks, that's a childhood background. If you had military training, that would be an adult background.

The difference between the base game is I let the player optionally choose one background from each category. So if you wanted to, you could be born under sign, then raised by monks and finally you sold your soul and you get all those benefits. So back, so previous characters were still valid under this new system, but if you made a new character, you could pick up two, three backgrounds after that. Um, there's a bunch of different things that I wanted to do, mainly with followers. Um change a lot of things that you could uh.

Do with them through dialogue, combat formations, which we eventually did add to Tempo of Elemental Evil, and I wanted to put different modes. You could put them in saying, um, do an attack without ever doing heal, um, or I don't want you ever Attack, Just heal yourself and other people in the group. So you could basically adjust it so you could get party members that behaved a little more like what did what you wanted them to. Of course, none of this was ever done, but I thought people would like seeing the intention I had for Arcanum 2 and also, if you're working on your own game, this is how I would redesign a system. If your intention is to let you bring over a character who'd already leveled up in the first game, if you want them to keep a character in the second game, this is how you put extensions.

Onto the very highest parts of all of your character features. So I thought that would be interesting and I hope people found that useful or at least of some mild interest. Foreign.
