+++
title = "What Is An Immersive Sim?"
date = "2025-12-15"
id = "iSF4xuEGgWs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about what is an immersive sim."
references = ["zX7SZWTj5_w", "XSKxD6v06P4", "goZlBF8Vsgs"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about what is an immersive sim.

Definitions are hard. I almost didn't want to make this video, but Shadow the Cat 7 actually joined my channel as a master member to not only have me answer this, but push it in the queue. So here we go.

Shadow the Cat 7 asks: "I was wondering what is Tim Kane's definition of an immersive sim? I don't think I've heard you mention them at all, but it seems like there's a lot of debate around the subject". There's not just a lot of debate over what an immersive sim is. There's a lot of debate about what anything is. I have an entire video devoted to what a cup is.

I'll link it below. I beg you, if you want to keep talking about what a cup is, please confine it to that video. The point of the video is to show you that something as simple and physically available to everyone on the planet as a cup can still suffer.

From being hard to define. Having said that, I did make a video called What is an RPG, Which, where I defined what a role playing game was to me, because so many of my hundreds and hundreds of videos are me talking about role playing games, because that's pretty much all I've made since 1993.. So I I made that video, hoping, against hope, to stem the tide of people arguing about what an RPG was, rather than the application of that definition to a particular game. By the way, it didn't seem to help. So I'm not sure this one's going to help, but let's try anyway, so immersive simulations to me, also called immersive sims, also called MSIMS, are a type of game that have these features.

One: it has many basic rules on how the world works. It's pretty much that simple. Things aren't scripted as special. Cases. There's a lot of general rules saying like: this damage type, does this, type of attack, has this kind of effect. Then the second thing is those rules interact with each other to create a large number of emergent systems, which I would define as features that were not necessarily intended — They might have been, but they weren't necessarily intended by the original designers, but they result from the application of those basic rules together. By the way, I think Will Wright is the master of making simple basic rules that interact with each other and create a lot of emergent properties, but I don't want to digress into Will Wright and his games. He makes great games, though, and then my third part of my MSIM definition would be the player, as well as everything else in the world follows those rules. I think those three things are what make an MSIM Having more of those features makes you more of an insim And because of that — and I said the same thing in my RPG video, which is here's all my things — of features that I think make up an RPG And if you have more of them, you're more of an RPG. To me, what that means is RPGs and MSIMs overlap frequently. They're not separate types of games, They're not separate genres, They're a way of describing a game And because they have, they can have features in common, they can overlap. If you have an RPG that has a lot of systemic effects because of its rules, then that RPG is also well along the IMIM continuum. If your MSIM has player agency — meaning I get to make my own character in that MSIM with their own kind of like sets of skills and maybe a background and all that — then that MSIM is along. The RPG: continuum. My own RPGs have MSIM elements in them.

I one thing I know I talk about a lot is: let's say you want to get by a door. Well, you can pick the lock if you have a lockpicking skill, and maybe you have lock picks, or you can go buy them, or maybe you can go find the key. Maybe you can steal it from an NPC using pickpocket. Maybe you can bribe them to give you the key. Maybe you can talk them into giving you the key. Maybe you can lie to them and say, "Oh, I lost my key and I'm supposed to have a key. Give me your key", maybe you can kill them and take it off their dead body and get the key. Or maybe you don't even worry about keys. You break the lock or you break the door or you break the. Wall next to the door, if all of these are handled by basic rules in the game, then you can find a way in. You can get past that door, which is your goal. All I said is: you want to get past this door, You can get past that door, and the game doesn't care how you did it and has provided you a lot of different ways of doing it.

Just do it. My RPGs, I like to fill with things like that. Now you'll notice that some of those things I mentioned about how to get the by the door were added by level designers. They had to make the lock, They had to make the key, They had to associate the key and the lock. Then they had to put the lock on the door and the key on in an inventory somewhere, whether it's in a chest or whether it's in a player or an NPC.

But some of some of those ways past the door are just automatic. Just the rules of the game automatically allow you to break things like doors. Or maybe there's a spell that warps wood or bends stone and therefore you can get by the door using that.

Nothing was special done, Nothing was it. The spell says: I affect anything made of wood and the door says: material type: wood. Once that's in there, those two basic rules — you know, this is what a material type my I'm made of and this is what my spell does to things of that material type — give you a way past, the door.

That's an IMSIM way past the door In that sense, if RPGs are simulations of a world and some of the solutions to some of the things you're trying to solve in that RPG are through the simulation, then that RPG is very MSIM. However, I've never considered my RPGs as MSIMs. First of all, I was making RPGs before the word MSIM even got invented. But also the very elements that make something an MSIM are the ones that I think also make good RPGs, like using systemic rules. So they overlap, but I use systemic rules because I thought it led to a good RPG, not because I was like I'm making an MSIM. But also bear in mind that a lot of my RPGs contain a lot of scripts, handwritten scripts by people, a lot of dialogues, which in a sense, are just handwritten scripts with a lot of text that get gets emitted by an NPC. But there's a lot of scripting that goes on behind the scenes, which is why you know you can say certain things to NPCs because you have certain traits or NPCs. Respond to reactions because there's a lot of scripting going on in that dialogue.

It's all handdone by designers. That is not mimi, That is very hand of the designer stepping in and making the game react to things they want the game to react to. That a systemic rule isn't covering, also, the player in my games is often immune to the very rules that you think the world has. I've made games where the player is the chosen one. In fact, I've made fun of that trope. The player is the only one who gets certain powers. The player is the only one who can use these certain items, can solve these puzzles, can get into these areas.

Because they're the chosen one. They've been picked by gods or they're the only remaining ancestor of this person who had the abilities, or maybe they just were the ones who picked the short. Straw on a lottery, but they're the chosen one and they're the only ones who get to do these things. Also u.

A lot of my games, a lot of my RPGs, have unique rules for players. I have a whole video about that. All these videos are linked down below in that the player can do things that NPCs can't. Frequently, what that's done is the player is immune to certain things. I talk about making players immune to being paralyzed or knocked out, mainly because that is not fun to play. Players love knocking out NPCs, but they don't love themselves being knocked out. Players love paralyzing NPCs, but it's not fun when your player character is paralyzed and then you just watch a lot of things happen. It basically takes away player agency, which I think is important for RPGs, but I never listed that as important for an MSIM. So I think, though too many people — not that I've made a definition which you all can argue about and will, I predict — I think too many people have rigid definitions, something they, and they do it in a binary way. This either is or isn't an RPG, This is or isn't an MSIM.

I think that's a bad thing, because the reason I do it on a continuum is you, here's a bunch of things that make up something like this, and the more of these features you have, the more of this you are. I think when people make it binary and say this is or isn't this thing, they artificially restrict what they play based on their own rigidity, and the only people who suffer because of that, ironically, is them, and they will argue that no, you got to have standards, or You know I only like RPGs and therefore I I know I hate that game. I don't have to play it because I already know in advance I hate it. But let me let me give you an example.

If I made a pure MSIM RPG, then I think it would have to have a story that emerged entirely from rules, world rules that that designers made but not imposed in any special cases by designers and especially script writers and narrative designers in any way. In other words, the story is completely emergent. The rules are set, the player is pushed into the world and anything that happens after that is not preset It pops out of the rules.

Will we ever have a game like an RPG, like That's a pure MSIM, I don't know. Am I talking about an advanced AI? Not necessarily, but is any complex rule system an AI? I don't know. You want to make a video?

Defining an AI and I'll answer you. In fact, the funniest short I ever made is one about a D and D co-en. I recommend you watch it. I'll link It'll be the last video linked on this video. I recommend you watch it so that Uncle Tim doesn't have to come and beat you over the head with a fiend folio And Shadow the Cat. I really hope this answered your question.
