+++
title = "Player Power From Build vs. Items"
date = "2025-04-09"
id = "JczYH1MhrfM"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about player power versus from builds versus from items."
references = ["nnH4XJBHvFQ", "N7b7LFXBZ9M", "CqMfiL7ySng"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about player power versus from builds versus from items.

This is a question from Anubis 1101 who, as a super mutant, got a priority video. So I stopped what I was doing, which was organizing my collection of amusing socks and underwear, to talk about this. So let's dive into it. Anubis1 asked — it's very long, Tim.

Are you familiar with the myth of the gun versus the myth of the sword? It's an ideological approach to fiction storytelling that I really love because it meshes well with game design. In essence, it describes where the character or player's power comes from. The myth of the sword is when the character's power comes from their own skill or stats. It emphasizes that power comes from within. Most fantasy settings lean heavily on this. The myth of the gun places the source of skills and abilities in the equipment, emphasizing finding and creating better gear.

Most sci-fi settings prefer this. Most games lean one way or the other, but often have a mix of both, especially RPGs. I think it's really cool to subvert the expectation for a setting and go the other way, like a fantasy setting where equipment enchanting has become ubiquitous and magical tools and devices are everywhere, or a sci-fi setting where extremely skilled individuals make use of low tech gear to overturn the status quo. Do you favor one myth over the other?

Through this lens, what kind of highle considerations would you make designing a new setting? Oh, that's a long question. So let's talk about that, first of all, let's kind of define our terms here.

Uh, character builds versus item builds. Character builds are things the player chooses, things like attributes, skills, perks, abilities, spells, backgrounds, anything that the player gets to choose either at character creation or when they level up. Contrast this with items, which would be weapons, armor, consumables, anything. That the player finds in the world and either puts on holds or eats. Now notice that some of these have some overlap, because several games out there have stuff like "Here's a book that if you read it, your skill rank will go up" or "Here's some kind of potion that will change how often your ability can be used Just for funsies. I count these as items because you — you have to find them versus something where you bought it in character creation or character upgrade and you have them forever. So a lot of games try to balance these. I I try to get have stuff from both, but I've never been a big balancer. If you watch this channel, you know that balancing isn't one of my strong points And I'm also not overly concerned with it, especially in single player RPGs. I don't mind if somebody finds some fun. Crazy, outof whack way of playing the game that they think is fun. I even have a video on balancing how to balance features which, uh, the short of it is stick a pin in it, but I'll link that video below In general, I prefer that neither one of these — uh, your power coming from your character build or your power coming from the items you choose to have on. I prefer neither of those being overwhelming. And by that I mean 80,, 90, or 100% of your power coming from that. And there are games that do that. There are games that everything's about what you bought for your character — you, what you bought for your character.

There are no items, There's no inventory. And then, of course, there are games that swing almost the entire other direction, which is there's very little you can make about your character other than the items that you pick up, control how that character is going to play and what abilities they're going to have. I prefer it somewhere in the middle. But if I had to choose — and I'm again, I'm not going to tell you I did a good job with this in my games, but this is what I always wanted to go for. I want character build to always be a little bigger than items, like in a perfect world, it would be like a 6040 split and then I could go 10% either way. So 50/50 up to 7030..

Why do I prefer the character build over itemization? A lot of reasons, first of all, the character's you I like. That's why I like singleplayer, non-party builds.

If I had my brothers, because that way you're making a character that's you or represents you or you think of, as in this world, that's me, I. Like that. You have lots of choices when you create a character or when the character levels up, and then you live with the consequences. And if those consequences can be massively overwhelmed by items you find in the world, it feels like the choices you made in character creation and when you go up a level don't matter as much.

So I don't really like that. I don't like that, that significant choice being washed out. Also, items, especially items that aren't handplaced in the world, you know things that aren't like.

Well, this boss always drops this item. A lot of items can just be random. You know you kill this monster. That was a random encounter and it randomly dropped this item that turned out to be really good for your build. So in games, especially my games, where items have a lot of randomization component, that's outside the player's choice. And you, play a game and you never find that item. And in Fallout it would be like making a really lucky character and never happening to find the limited edition Red Rider BB gun.

It's kind of the best weapon you can get for that lucky build, especially for eyeshot. But in addition, because items themselves either are generated randomly or there's a huge range of them that you have to go find, items can have properties that aren't good for your build. Maybe they weigh a lot and the game has encumbrance and you made a low strength character, or maybe they can only be purchased in merchant stores. If you remember my loot tables, maybe one of the um — the only way you can really get this item is to buy it in a shop and it costs prohibitively much to get it, or its ammo is prohibitively expensive to use. Or maybe it has a really low durability and your character is not, uh, one that took repair skills, or maybe there, if it's a class-based game, it's a it's restricted for a class you're not playing. Or maybe you've chosen a player race and it's restricted to one you're not playing, or a host of other restrictions that can happen. It needs a particular minimum skill or requires a perk, and you don't have that. So here's this item that you think you would like, but for some reason you can't use it that can be frustrating because of that. I don't like the majority of power for a player coming from items from the world. It's too slot machine, too risky And, like I said, there are whole games built around that where you're leveling up is basically getting stuff at random. But that's not what I tend to make Now I could be persuaded into making a game where the balance of items — uh power to character power — was different, like you get more from itemization. But it would have to be something that the games design required, especially the design pillars. For example, if you made a setting where the world's mostly empty, so it doesn't have teachers or schools or people and books or trainers that support this idea that you've learned things, maybe that really diminishes skills, and so it's more important for the items you find, especially if it's a game about scavenging. Similarly, if you make a game with mechanics where there is no leveling up, there is no character progression, well then everything about your, the power of the character, is going to come from the items they acquire. I get that you could make a game like that, but I've tended not to.

Now I will say that in some ways Arcanum had this. If you look at the magic versus tech schism that was going on in there, it really did become more of a skill versus item thing because tech could be mass — prodduced. You could easily make tech items with the schematics you had. They talk about the fact that, you know, guns are something that were being mass-produced.

In this world, where wands can't be mass-produced, magic items can't be mass-produced. So one reason technology was catching up and overtaking magic was because of that mass-produced quality, which I ties into Anubis' question of, as, sci-fi became, as Arcania became more of a sci-fi setting, we were kind of reinforcing that. Mass production means itemization is probably more important to a tech character. But in general, though, because it's it was, you know, a game I I wanted to be, I still liked the characters build to. Have a big effect on how the game was played. So I wanted to answer address Anubis' question of what would you look at for a setting.

And in the end, it's the same, the advice I give for everyone, which is do what's best for the game you're making. If you're following any of the advice I've given on this channel, before you did anything, you wrote down your design pillars. So you wrote down here's what's super important for this game.

You know, am I going for realism? Am I going for exploration? You know what's important for this game. Then, if you do what I do, when you go you design the setting and then the story and then the mechanics. By the time you get to that mechanics part, you already have a good idea of what the setting is like and what the story is like. So then, as you're making, mechanics, you can think: do I want these mechanics to be the main source of the player's power or do I want them to come from items? And you should decide that early, because I think once you decide it comes from items, you're really going to have to pay attention to where items come from, how they get dropped, how they're made available to the player, because if the player makes a character that's going to be very, very sensitive, their power changes dramatically based on how good their items are. And items are something that are relatively random. You have to find a shop that has it and buy it. You have to happen to kill the right monster that drops it. This is going to be something that players are really going to care about. So you're going to have to pay attention to how you itemize your world, Anyway. I hope that answers your question Anubis 1101..
