+++
title = "Arguing About Games"
date = "2026-01-09"
id = "JDnunE5HZ0c"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Industry"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about arguing about games."
references = ["gCjHipuMir8", "bA-P3p7PdEc", "lauoxw_m6cg", "lmgJVUuS1I8", "-tFCCGeduUc"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about arguing about games.

I suppose this might be considered a not so fun Friday video, but I just want to talk about it because it's something that happens so much. There's so much arguing. I mean, there's so much arguing about everything on the on in life, but I make games. So let's talk about arguing about games. I'll start by saying people have always argued about games. They've always argued about games.

This is not new. I think the volume and voseiferousness have gone up, but the actual arguing — arguing - it's not new. People have always had different tastes and they wanted different things. I made a video game called do gamers know what they, what they like, what they want, which people took as me going: you guys have no idea what you want. I think each one of you individually knows what you want. Where things break down is you don't seem to realize or recognize that there's a lot of other people out there and they all want different things. And this isn't just gamers. Developers do this too. Developers want different things when they make a game. If you're making a game and you're an animator, you want the best animation you could possibly do, which means you want big, complicated rigs on your creatures and you want a very smooth and high frame rate. Now, programmers: they also want a high frame rate, but they also want fewer bugs. They need things to be optimized. They don't want things to be too big, because that means big load times and or maybe long decompressions and stuff. So that might mean less art, so these conflict. You know the fact that they both want the a good game and both of them want a high frame rate, but they want it for different reasons. That conflicts and that means somebody's going to not get what they want. This happens to gamers, too. As a developer, too, This happens to me. Oh, by the way, the whole thing about gamers not knowing what they want, I made another one called developers don't know what you want either. And that's part of the reason why, because there are just so many different gamers and they all say they want different things. I mean, they ultimately want a good game at a good frame rate, but there's so many different ways of getting that. As a developer, I always try to make games with the features I want, but then I have people who get mad at me and argue that I should be adding other features, too that I do not like. Romance is one of them, so many people will argue with me: well, you should be adding it because a lot of people like it. So you're telling me to add a feature that I don't.

Like and don't want because a lot of people want it. But you don't recognize that there are features you want that a lot of gamers aren't asking about or don't care about. This is, I think, goes to the root of all of these issues, because, guess what?

There are features that no one is asking for, like crashing. No one ever says "I wish my game crashed more". But even features like that that no one wants, people have different thresholds, different priorities about how much that that thing matters to them. So if they're playing a game that crashes once or twice, they may go: "I'm having so much fun in this game, I don't care". Where other people the game crashes once or twice and they're like "That's it, I'm deleting this game.

Obviously it was made by a stupid developer who's stupid". And they move on to another game and they point at this objectively bad thing — a crash. No one ever asked for that, but they don't seem to recognize that people have different thresholds And if you're really loving a game and it crashes on you a couple times, you're like "That's what my save games are for" And they move on. I think the problem now is gaming has grown and that growth has made a lot of issues. First of all, there's more games out there.

You would think that would be a good thing. Hey, guess what?

With all those games out there- 25,000 a year just on Steam — there's going to be a game for you, I guarantee it. But good luck finding it I got a whole video on discoverability and how hard it is to find games these days, because if you don't see a review about it, or you don't see someone mention it or a friend doesn't, say "Hey, here's a game you're going to love", You may never ever know it's out There are just too many games, plus, there's a lot more gamers. Um, there's a ton of gamers out there And this causes a lot of things. There's a possibility to make a lot more money. Used to be, we were excited if a game sold 10,000 units, then a 100,000, then a million. Now we want 10 million or 100 million sales of you know copies.

This, generation of more money, has caused a lot of consolidation of the game industry into fewer and fewer companies that can publish. They want to make more money because they're throwing a lot of money into these games. They need to make a lot of money out of these games. That changes the nature of how games are decided to be made. Like I mentioned earlier, we — I just talked about more games and um more and how publishers make games. But with all the different gamers out there, the huge variety of gamers, they want different things And a lot of arguing I see. See online is gamers arguing past each other, like nobody's saying I want a slow frame rate. But there are a lot of people going: I want high frame rate because I love shooters and I need that millisecond. You know [clears throat] accuracy that comes with high frame rate. And there are other people going: I want huge variety and I don't care if it drops to 30 frames per second. Give me a huge variety. I want pretty games.

Those people are arguing past each other. One is saying "I want frame rate over everything else", The other saying "I don't really care about frame rate as long as it doesn't drop below a certain floor". Sometimes those gamers deny the other groups even exist. When I see them argue online, they're saying things like: "Tim, no one's asking for a low frame rate". I agree, but there are a lot of people who are not asking for a high frame rate. They care about different things than you do. And you should acknowledge they exist, but you don't because you'd either don't want to or it would wreck your argument. So I see a lot of argue people arguing past each other, or even if that means denying that the other group even exists. And the arguing has grown more hostile.

Gamers just always outrightly call developers like me stupid or lazy or greedy. And not all gamers, a lot of gamers, though, or I should say loud gamers. I don't think I ever go anywhere that has a forum group where developers aren't being called stupid andor lazy, andor greedy at some.

Point in the discussion of a game. And gamers even call other gamers stupid. Um, if, you, if a gamer sees a game selling well that they don't like, they call the gamers who are buying them stupid. They're stupid gamers who don't know what they want. I've seen gamers call a game bad that sells well. I've also seen gamers call a game bad that has a very high user review score. So obviously there are a lot of game players out there who like it, but for some reason these gamers are like saying, "Nope, those people's opinions don't matter. They're dumb or stupid or don't know what they want or for whatever reason. I'm discounting them", and then what happens is I've been talking to developers who look at those forum posts and go: "Wait a minute, I'm being called stupid and lazy and greedy by someone who doesn't know how to. Make games, Won't learn how, despite all the tools, and that the barrier to entry is lower than it's ever been in the history of gaming. And then, on top of that, they pirate them and they call me stupid, lazy and greedy".

Now, this isn't all developers and they're not talking about all gamers, but I have heard this before, I'm sure I'm going to hear it again. What this results in is some people are leaving gaming altogether. I know gamers who've gone off and found new hob hobbies. They mainly play board games now or card games, because there just isn't this arguing so much in that area. They aren't basically belittled for expressing the game. You know what they like and don't like online.

Also, developers leave. I know a lot of developers who left the industry and found jobs in associated industries. And I know the programmers were paid better too. So people are just leaving the game industry. But some people are leaving parts of the game industry. There's um a lot of gamers who are going indie. They're saying, "Oh, I just buy indie games now because I can support a small or even solo development team and I get something exactly what I want".

And I think that's great. I know developers who've gone indie and that's awesome too. I I have a whole video on why I will never go solo, but I love that decision on that they make. But I've also known the opposite. I know a number of developers who've joined big companies because once they're in a big company they don't have to make decisions on their games and therefore they don't have to be responsible for the decisions on the game They used to go for job stability.

Not so much anymore, but I do know some that just go "Look, I don't want to go to meetings where I'm asked what to make. I want to go to meetings where I'm told what to make". That has gotten to be a bigger group. I'm a little surprised at it, now, despite all this, the arguing continues online. And part of that, too, is now.

In this age, a lot of people make money off the arguing. I know people probably make money off this video by claiming that I'm saying things I never said or things I never meant. It's easy to take a clip and go: "He meant gamers are stupid or developers are stupid or publishers are stupid or whatever". And I'm not saying any of that.

I'm saying people make money off of getting eyeballs and clicks. And so there's a people out there have a monetary reason to keep the arguing going. So I always like to give recommendations. And it's tough on this because a lot of you have already discounted everything I'm going to say. But here's what I will say: Buy the games you want to see more of. I know a lot of you go.

That doesn't work. There's not enough of us Don't have buying power. But it works on solo and indie games. And if you see a game selling a lot, then that means there are gamers who like that game And sequels happen for games that sell a lot, not games. You like games that sold, and it's true for indies too. If they make two games and one sells a lot and one doesn't, they're probably going to make a sequel to the one that sells a lot.

So that's the only thing I can recommend. You can argue all day long and you can argue past each other and you can all call each other names, but ultimately if you spend your money in the areas you want, things made sure. On huge games, if there's a whole bunch of gamers who are spending their money on it, your extra dollars aren't going to matter. But on indie games it certainly will And it will result in you getting more games that you want. It's the only way forward through this I can see. And I hope you do it.
