+++
title = "Questions & Answers"
date = "2023-09-17"
id = "jWrrhj_uAT4"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Q&A"]
summary = "I answer a lot of questions in one video, including my most inspirational setting, company food catering, the difference between AA and AAA games, making better boss encounters, thoughts on save scumming, and thoughts on asset reuse."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I'm going to try to answer several questions that I've gotten on the channel through comments.

I was trying to make video about each one of them but they don't. I I don't want to Pat a video just to make 10 or 15 minutes and I think I can do a number of comments if I just go through them all at once. So I'm going to try to do that. See how that works.

Let's start with Lazar satulovic 6484, who asks: I wanted to ask you if you ever had any ideas for an RPG that is more grounded and set in a real world historical setting. If not, what period would be, would you say, is your favorite or most influential or inspiring for designing your worlds? I will say I don't really have a real world historical setting that is my favorite. Not a huge history buff.

Um, I know it. Um, one of my biggest complaints in high school to, uh, one of my teachers who was trying. To get me to move from history to AP History was: you have literally never taught me anything past World War II.

Nothing. I don't know anything about the Vietnam War, don't know anything that happened in the literally the 50s, the 60s, the 70s or the 80s. And so I told them: unless you're going to teach me that in your AP History Class, I'm not interested. He got so mad, he took it up with my mother, who basically said: I agree with my son and I didn't take AP History.

So, while I don't have a historical setting, when push comes to shove I probably like medieval settings the best, mainly because most of my games are: here's a setting with a Twist, an Arcanum was. Here's a medieval setting that had an industrial revolution, I, like you know. Here's a medieval setting that may have zombies, or here's a medieval setting that may have, you know, a vampire or whatever. I just I find that setting a little more fun to design for because then, once you get to modern day, with police and guns, it's less interesting. And then when you get the future, where it's like I've got scanners and I can beam out, I'm just if, I, if push came to shove, I'd probably pick around 14th century with a Twist to make is my setting. So the next question, sharp dog 664 asks: hi, Tim, I would love to hear your thoughts on catering and Food Service whilst you was working at interplay Troika and currently what it is like, an obsidian.

Do they have weekly dishes based on the games you create and so forth? I hate to break it to you, sharp dog, but there are no catering and food services at any. Of those companies. At interplay we may have been given food as a launch Day celebration when you're game shipped. Troika, we did it. We did three kinds of food. We did a regular weekly one, a crunch time one and then a special when we ship the game. We had special celebrations for that, but usually we just brought stuff in from restaurants. Same thing at carbine and obsidian. Um, it was really common to get food, especially dinner, offered to during crunch.

Uh, when games shipped we had big launch parties: the obsidian launch party for The Outer Worlds. The food there was so fun it was themed on the food from The Outer Worlds we had tarmac and cheese. We had a whole bunch of really fun stuff, but regular food service no.

So the next question: power GI 3996 asks: what is the difference between double A games like The Outer Worlds? I think, and you're right — and AAA games? Is it just scope and cost? Also, what are the differences between working on Double A games versus Triple A games, if any? So, power GI, this was almost its own video because my answer for this is a little longer and I'll give examples, but it boils down to its mostly budget.

Double A has a smaller budget than AAA, but the budget means less time to make the game, a smaller team to make the game and to QA the game. Smaller marketing budgets: there's some great games out there that you've never heard of because they don't have a marketing budget. And there are some good games out there that you've played and liked because it had an amazing marketing budget.

And then, um, budget also affects scope, but there's a caveat there and that's what I wanted to mention. That's really why I wanted to answer your question. Budget tends to be linear. As budgets go up, it tends to be a linear increase. So you go from a 1 million to a 5 million to a 10 million game, and, yeah, it goes up to 100 million. But scope is exponential. Every feature you add is exponential to the scope of the game because they all interact. I talk about often there's a fabric, there's like a weave of design. I'll give you an example.

I've, in the past, I've told people I kind of wish I had taken newspapers out of Arcanum because a lot of work went into them, but they're really only connected to quests. And let me tell you, let me give you an example of what, how scope Works, how everything gets interconnected, and why I mentioned newspapers. So in Arcanum you could hear rumors from people. There was a whole it was systemic. These are all systemic things, so a designer could just put our colon in his dialogue. I have a whole video on generated dialogue and that could generate a rumor which could lead to a nearby in Dungeon or attacking Bandits or whatever, and that would be a quest, a side quest. Quests themselves exist that the players could put in and those also had generated dialogue op codes. They could put them in and um Quest could Advance the story State and the storytape was also systemic. It was something that was stored so at any particular time someone could say what's our story State and it could tell you where in the linear storyline you currently were, even if you were getting to that point in the linear storyline in a non-linear way.

So those are all systemic features of Arcanum. And then I added the newspaper, which was also systemic. What it was supposed to do is connect to each one of those. You were supposed to be able to read the newspaper and possibly get a rumor which could then lead to quests. You could read the newspaper and directly get a Quest from it. You could read the newspaper and see what the story state was.

All we really ended up chipping with was quests could, when they change state, inject something into the newspaper. Queue cues were generated randomly, newspaper headlines were generated randomly, but they'd also looked a story state to see if something major should be said. Quest could inject things saying: hey, at the next newspaper, say this, so like if you burn down a factory in France. I think that got injected as a newspaper headline. So, newspapers and rumors and quests and story States — we're all supposed to interact a lot more than they did.

Why didn't they budget, ran out of time to do it? Why didn't I remove newspapers? Because, as I like to remind producers, removing something doesn't save time. Remove something takes time, if I were to remove newspapers, we'd have to fix up what when quests were planning to inject stuff in the newspapers, because it wasn't enough just to make that injection, do nothing, because maybe the quest person would like: well, I need some other way for the player to know that this Quest changed something in the world.

We'd have to figure out some other way. Maybe it would become the quest Giver would just tell you right then when you finished the quest and change the state, rather than have it go into the newspaper and they would just tell you. But even then that was kind of. Some people had planned for the newspaper to be the way it got conveyed. So I wish newspapers had been much bigger than they were, and if I'd known there would be as small as this, I wouldn't have put them in. But even taking them out wasn't possible because we didn't have the budget for it. And yes, outerworld was double A, not Triple A, which is why it was shorter, which why its feature set wasn't as big as what I wanted, which is why Monarch wasn't as big as what I wanted.

It's all goes down to budget. Anjin filipovic 2851 asks: is there a better way to make an encounter with a high-level boss or enemy than just more hit points? It's 2023 and I still feel the majority of RPGs use the same old boring concept of bullet sponge, which makes the game just more tedious and not hard or challenging. Oh yeah, there's a whole bunch of things you can do with bosses and I've seen these in games and I know you know what they are. One I love is stages, and I mean that both the actual physical, realized stage that the boss is on and also a phase based one. So the physical stage is when the area the boss is fighting it actually matters. When there's cover, when there are things you can adjust to create pits or lava that can damage you when you go into. When it's you have to watch out for hazards in the world in addition to the boss. When there are hazards, you can get the boss into. Those are all ways of making fun boss encounters that have more to do with the area the boss is in than the boss itself. But there's also phased based stages that a boss can go through, and you've — I know you've seen this — where over time the boss changes.

He. May change physically, he may change what attacks he has, he may change what defenses he has, and what's great about that is mostly the telegraph to the player. Somehow, like all of a sudden, you know, he turns, you know, to a different shape, or he had now as a shield or whatever, so he won't get damaged as much. You have to do something else. These are — all those phase based ones — are really good ways of making interesting boss fights, because the player has to react to him rather than just shove as much damage into the boss as possible. Another thing you can do to make bosses more interesting is to give them henchmen, give them extra things. You know um creatures on that stage that they're fighting on that fight for them, and a lot of times these are just trash mobs. But Trash mobs are important because not only are they fun for you to do AOE spells on, but a lot of games have things, mechanics, that whenever you kill something you get a bonus.

I'm falling forward to that. Whenever you killed something, you would get if you had a certain perk. You could increase your critical hit or, um, even Bank it if you had another perk.

So there was a myrler queen boss that would shoot out these little mirelurk spawn. Those were great, if you had a luck based character and you had those perks for shooting a spawn, getting a bunch of critical hits banged and then using them on the marlar queen. That was cool.

Other things you can do, especially in RPGs, is you can have some pretty high hit point henchmen helping the boss that you've met before. Maybe you've met them in the storyline, you've done Quests for them or quests that involved them, and then boom, there they are with the boss helping them out and you know, oh God, that guy's got that really powerful laser, that guy's a sniper rifle or that guy does this AOE attack. They can the telegraphing of the attacks they do occurred in earlier encounters you had with the boss's henchmen who then show up to help him. You can also just have low hit point henchmen that just exists to sap your health or your Mana or create hazards or do whatever they're going to do. Um, but that's a way you can make a boss a lot more interesting than just putting Health on them.

Stavros, nicolau and many other people asked a question: do you feel similarly unconcerned about saves coming, or is that behavior something worth mitigating by Design? In the latter case, what are some good ways to prevent or minimize saves coming?

I think what he meant. I didn't, I wasn't, I was unconcerned with — I believe it was um speed runs and all I can tell you is I'm completely unconcerned with saves coming. I don't care.

Most of my games let you save anywhere. I even let you save in the middle of combat in my games — and there's a lot of games that — why they let you save anywhere, they disable saving in combat just because there's a lot of game State associated with combat. So making a save game that works in combat is a lot of extra work. But I I thought it was useful and I I don't mind if people want to save anywhere. I I understand the frustration of if there are places, checkpoints, that you could say that you have to redo a lot of things over and over and over again, um, because a designer thought, well, if you, I don't want. You to save right before this encounter or right before this thing. And yes, saves coming means people can save right before picking a lock, or save right before a particular combat, or save right before you're going to go into a conversation and try to use your speech skills.

I'm okay with that. It's to me what's part of an RPG. And then, finally, because wow, I'm going a long time, Hollow 8136 asks. So I'd really love to hear your general thoughts on asset reuse and what goes into the decision making for what needs new assets and what can reuse or retool existing ones.

That's a good question, Hollow. I personally like asset reuse, and I'm assuming you mean more than just art asset reuse, because even though, like a Troika, we had very little art asset reuse in our games because we made two isometric and then a 3D, and the two isometric had such a different art look. But arcanuman Temple did use the same Engine with modifications. I think bethesda's done a really good job of reusing the same engine for decades and Fallout New Vegas was only made because in that short period of time, because they got to reuse a lot of assets that were already supplied with the engine. So I'm all for asset reuse. Uh, I think there is a group of developers who want to make brand new stuff for every new game they make, even if they're now currently reusing engines, like their use Unity or unreal or their own internal engine for every game. But for me I'm like, if there's a if, you can reuse assets — trees, rocks, textures, engine components, sound effects, anything like that — if it makes sense to reuse them, I really don't believe in remaking the wheel every time. I do think you should make new stuff. I don't want to make just a game where you're reshuffling assets like a deck of cards, but I think judicious use of reuse of assets is a smart game development technique. I wish more companies would do that, just so games could be made a little faster. Okay, I think that's enough questions for today. I hope I answered a lot of people's questions and I will do this again when I've got another stack of questions that have shorter answers.
