+++
title = "The Arcanum One-Point Fiasco"
date = "2023-06-23"
id = "keTG-5WPccU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Character Systems"]
summary = "Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about what I now call, in very distant hindsight, the Arcanum."
references = []
+++

Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about what I now call, in very distant hindsight, the Arcanum.

One point, Fiasco, but let me give you context. I love to give context, so recently I had someone who was a director — director - director at a company — ask me how I made decisions as a director. Um, they were often asked to make decisions on things that they weren't quite sure about. Either it wasn't in their area of expertise or they just weren't sure. There were multiple Solutions and they weren't sure. And at the end of this video I'll tell you what I told them, not because I don't want to tell you now, but because you need to understand big things that happened to me to understand why I gave this person the answer I did now. I talked about in The Fallout video that there were decisions made that didn't 100 agree with.

One of them was the. The ending. I wanted it to be a happy party. Yay, you saved the. Vault.

Leonard bararski suggested: no, you kick. You get kicked out of the Vault by the overseer and eventually everyone's like: why, I want to kill him. And so we threw away in for you to kill him too. This is what we shipped with and people loved it and I remember thinking, wow, we almost went with my idea on the party, which I think now people would have thought was stupid. So it's that little thing that goes in your head, like all your decisions are good ones. But there was another thing, there was the timer that we had for finding the water chip, that if you didn't find the Water trip by a certain amount of time, the game would just end. I hated it I hated it.

About half the team liked it. About half the team didn't. Some people didn't feel strongly, so I had to guess kind of where. On that dividing line they were, but then when it was suggested — hey, there's ways of extending the timer, like you know, getting the water merchants in um The Hub descent water to your vault — this was kind of used to sway more people and I realized most people wanted it. We shipped with it.

People hated it, especially because since they made the game feel so rushed that even though we had all these side quests inside areas, people felt like they couldn't do them. So we patched it and removed it and I remember thinking, ugh, I wish I'd gone with my original decision on that. But of course in the back of my mind I was thinking: well, your original idea for the ending wouldn't have been good. So that was my mind state, when, the following scenario happened: we were well into doing Arcanum, I want to say we were just a few months from its shipping and it had been designed so that everything cost an increasing number of points, whether it was attributes or skills or spells or Tech degrees. The first one costs a few points, the next one cost more, the next one cost even more and it went up so that the highest one in each one cost a lot of points.

For example, um, I remember spells went one, three, five, seven, nine. So there are five spells in each College. That's how much they cost, so the first one was a point, the next one was three points, then five, then seven, then nine. This meant that to buy all these spells in one college would cost you 25 points. Now, keep in mind, I don't think you ever got more than five points when you went up level.

So the first three colleges are spells in. A college you could buy, but after that you had to save your points. This was true for Tech degrees. It's what you do for everything else.

Well, people didn't like that. We heard back from QA that they didn't like having things they wanted to buy but they couldn't. They felt uncomfortable when they were left over points, so they often felt the need to spend those points on low level things. And then again they'd go up a level and they still couldn't afford what they wanted to buy. And I'm not exaggerating when I'm telling you that the entire Arcanum team wanted to change.

Now, remember, there were only 14 people at Troika on this, although we did hear from Sierra QA that they also didn't like um, that hierarchy of points. But let's just talk about Troika, because these people I saw every day, every single. Person at Troika, told me I should switch it to one point. So that's 13 people of the 14.. I was the Lone outlier and I tried to explain to them: hey well, if we do this Now, it only costs five points to get every spot on a college. And they're like: well, put prerequisites on it.

I'm like, but no matter what brexit I put on it, whether I put a skill per requisite or an attribute or even a level, the anything but level it's trivial for you to get, because everything costs one point and the level you get there eventually. So, even though I I would think there's no way for you to be able to buy all these, you can't become a specialist in all the colleges because they just cost so many points to specialize. Now, once you hit a certain level and you up some skills which you could do because everything only costs a point — boom, you can now become a specialist in a ton of colleges.

This is what I call the one point, Fiasco. So, against my better judgment, I changed this and, as bugs started rolling in, I put minimum attributes, minimum skills, minimum level as prerequisites on things to try to stop this. Keep in mind, this was all at the end: where has happened with Fallout people go? I can't believe you shipped with certain bugs and I tried to explain. You know, I was trying to find a crash bug, a random. You could be doing anything, it seems, and the game would suddenly just crash the desktop. So you have priorities. That's why game ship with bugs, because you have priorities of things to look for and not everything's a 100 priority, not everything can be. So, while I wanted to get back to this, other things started taking priority: crashes, save Game, Corruptions, um, even worse, um, you know, like things not animating correctly, quests that couldn't be finished, things were a lot more priority than hey.

I made a character who you know, specialized in seven of the spell: colleges. So what ended up happening is we shipped an unbalanced disaster, not just I know most. You think: well, what about that harm spell?

Yeah, that's a perfect example of at some point I was supposed to do a balance pass on all the Spells and I literally never got to it because it was never a high enough priority versus everything else I was doing. And by the time Arcanum shipped, we were back to seven day work weeks at 14 hour days. So if you think there was like a minute, I could slide that in there, just literally wasn't a minute and I know that's funny.

People go: oh, look at that, he's got an excuse. It's really an explanation and sometimes I wish people could understand the difference. I know it was a problem. I wish it wasn't there. We started getting feedback about how bad it was and I kid you, not one of those 13 people came to me a couple months after we shipped and he looked me right at in all seriousness. He said you never should have switched everything to one point and I was like you hypocrite. You, were one of the people who convinced me you shouldn't listen to me.

So if you remember something I said in a previous video, just was it yesterday, a couple days ago, where I said: success has many fathers, but failure is an orphan? This is something you need to understand if you ever accept a lead or direct. A role, if something's a good idea, you should — and people expect you to — and get mad if you don't spread the credit around. But if something's a bad idea, you just have to take it, you just have to go: yep, bad idea. And there's a reason for this, if you do blame people for some of the ideas that they convince you to do, they just don't want to work with you again. And these can be really good people. You know it's like, oh, I wish you would just have stuck the art and not thought about design. But also it can happen from above. You can have people who literally responsible for your paycheck — whether they're in the hierarchy above you or they're from the publisher — who literally demand certain things going into the game like, I don't know, an unskippable tutorial intro. You can't say no, but if you think any one of them is going to step up after the game ships and that feature is panned and go — yeah, sorry, that was me. No, they're not going to do that, they will not have your back. And if you refuse to do this, one of two things will happen: either you get away with it, but then you find you won't be in a put in, kept in a position of authority later, which has happened — or you find Publishers just don't want to give you money because you don't listen, you're not a team player. Both of those things have happened and it leads to these situations where stuff goes into the game that you just have to grit your teeth. People say they hate and you're like: um, I mean, there are things that if people thought about it, there was no way you even possibly could. Have been held, well, you can always be held responsible, but you couldn't possibly have known.

If you think a game director looks at every single inventory icon, there are thousands. If you think a game director looks at every line of code, there are tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands, of lines. They don't, but if they ship a game that crashes a lot, you can guarantee that director is going to hear a lot about it, especially from the people above them. Now, I even said on the Fallout video that I wasn't gonna name names to people above me for particular bugs.

There's always going to be bugs, but that success has many fathers and fairs and or something is something you really need to think about if you ever want to be a lead or director, because you will be held responsible for everything bad. But people don't really want to give you credit for anything good. So the previous videos I had about the challenges facing programmers or designers or artists: those affect the leads doubly so and the director: he's held responsible for all of those areas and audio and QA and a lot of things that are publishings, decisions. So these things you want to keep in mind before you ever accept one of those roles. Which is why, a long time ago, when I mentioned working with these quiet power powerhouses, these people who are just brilliant but they stay in positions where they're not leads, I sometimes think that they had the right idea all along that, yes, they avoided the fame, but they also avoided a lot of the blame and because of that they just had a very, very happy career and I can tell you I was happy in my role.

As, like, a senior programmer or senior designer, because you get to do a lot of stuff. But ultimately, you know, most of the credit and blame is going to go to the person above you, which is why I found it very annoying when, people who were very new to a project wanted their idea, almost demanded their ideas done, knowing maybe they didn't know, but you knew that if this idea was a good one, they would jump up and take credit for it, but if it was a bad one, they would just sit there, they wouldn't do anything and you'd be held responsible. And that one point thing for Arcanum I've sat on for 25 years because I hated it I hated it, but it came up in my discussion with this director because I wanted to point to and say: look, here's my answer. If you're a director, how you should make decisions. You've delegated a lot of authority to your leads and to a lot of your seniors.

Talk to them, get their opinion on things, weigh this with your own experience — and it's experience Beyond just making games, because at one point you're going to be the you're. It'll be the first time you make a game or the first time you're lead on a game. Hopefully you have experience and related things like tabletop games and card games and, like I said, you know I I learned about a lot about level design just by wandering around Disneyland with an open eye and educated eyes. You know people who worked on theme parks told me things about their design.

But ultimately you have to go with your gut — and I know that sounds antithetical to all of you. Delegated authority and you have a lot of. Experience that can guide you, but ultimately you have to decide with your gut. I just feel this is the right way to go. Usually, your experience and your leads will guide you in the right direction, or at least in the space where there's not a particularly bad choice in the space you're deciding from, but not always — and there are a few times I've been led to a very bad decision and sure enough, everybody's backed away and let me hang.

And that is what's going to happen. If you choose to be in a leader, direct role, you have the ultimate decision and people will want you to do what they want to do, knowing that ultimately, they're not going to be held responsible for it. So that's something for you to think of if you ever want to lead or direct a role or anything — a high level role.

In a game. You may not want to do that. You may just want to stick to being a senior for your career and that's a good choice.

But that whole one point thing with Arcanum has always bugged me because, looking back on it, I told that director with all honesty, I'm not sure I could have made another Choice. I'm not sure I could have looked at 13 people that I worked day in and day out with four years on this project and said every single one of you is wrong and I'm right. I just don't think I ever could have done that, even though every fiber of my being, every experience I had in tabletop and other video games, was telling me this is a bad decision. There was that little part of me went: remember you and you wanted the party at the end of Fallout, so that's. The best answer I can come up with use your guide to be guided by your experience, but ultimately go with your gut.
