+++
title = "Relinquishing Creative Control"
date = "2024-05-28"
id = "kFbrKAwW5kI"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Management", "IP"]
summary = "I talk about how to decide what parts of your IP you should choose to let other people be responsible for during development."
references = ["Ooe44v7j-bo"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about relinquishing creative control.

I'm going to answer a question from mjy media who asks: hey, Tim question, do you have tips on relinquishing creative control? I wrote a ttrpg book a couple years ago and handing off my writing to artists was the hardest thing to do. I had so many notes but I didn't want to smother the artists. Some artist art didn't turn out true to my vision and I'm so somewhat unhappy with around 20% of the art. I'm writing another book Now. Tips for this next round.

That is a good question. Uh, it's tough to answer, especially in general. Also, I want to point out I already have a video on task delegation, but that's more how to delegate the task and then manage the resulting work. If that's what you're looking for about specifically how to hand out work and manage the people who are doing it, i' recommend that video and I'll link it below what I'm going to talk about here. Is how to decide what bits of your IP you even want to give up control on by having someone else do entirely. I'm going to talk about how I tend to break down work into three areas and then that controls that that determines how I'm going to relinquish that control. So those three areas are things I care very deeply about that I think are critical to the game being my game, people playing the game going — yeah, that feels like a Tim Kane game. And then there's things that I watch closely, but either I don't care as deeply about it or I know that there are people who can handle it and I'll talk about that. And then that leaves a third class of things I completely frequently and historically have just completely delicated to other people.

So I will talk about each one of these, but I should let you know that these different categories include lots of different parts of the IP. It might be code, it might be design, it might be setting, it might be story, it might be scheduling, it might be test plans — pretty much almost anything. But art is something that will probably fall into the first two categories. Art usually falls into the third one. So let's go through each one of these categories one by one. So things I care deeply about those are, um, those are things. Usually it's code things or well, I'll talk about what they are. But what I, what I, what I usually do with these things is I either make a first pass myself, so the person who is going to do second and third and fourth passes sees the direction I want to go and the tone and what I'm expecting from it, or I will make a list of all the important things that I expect to see. I usually give these as I want these, but there's a hint of I demand these. It's a want, it's basically I expect to see these.

If I don't, we're going to have to talk about it. So if you really feel like one of these doesn't belong, I hope you can justify it. These are features that I will watch from start to finish. So I let people know who getting who are getting delegated these features that if you're working on them, you'll be working with me a lot, a lot. I be coming by your office, we will be having meetings, we'll be exchanging emails and slack messages, so if that makes you uncomfortable, let me or your lead know, because someone else will have to work on it.

This is a feature that's important to me because I think it's important to the game. So I have had some people move because they think that's too stressful. I've had people who love it, um, and that they especially love it because they want to learn how this process works, because they want to be a lead someday. I'm frequently confounded by people who don't want to do certain things in game development but eventually want to be a lead in charge of people who are doing those things. If you've never done those things, if you've just watched other people do those things, I don't think you should be a lead. I've had this discussion with people who want to be leads and some people who were made leads, and it was a — it was an Uncle Tim — tough love situation where I was like I don't think you should be doing this because you do not have the experience to do it. That's why seniors manage people. To learn how to manage before they become leads, where management is a big chunk of what they're expected to do anyway.

The areas that I tend to care deeply about are Code, system design, the game setting and the game story, and these are all different. So for code, I may do a big chunk of the code and then pass it off to someone, or at least do all the API or the high level, or have very specific coding instructions if it's going to go off to a senior who I know can handle this. The same thing for system design: I may work out a system design on my own before I pass it over to a lead or a senior system designer to take over.

The setting may get written down in detail. The story may be written down not only in detail but by act and what Maps I expect. To be in what act and what characters I expect to be in what act. These are things that are done before anything gets passed off to anybody else, because these are the things that I think usually make a Tim cane game feel very much like a Tim Kane game, and if I'm going to be a game director on a game like that, I want to feel like a Tim Kane game. I want people to get what they're expecting to get from me.

Um, the second category: these are things that I watch closely. Um, I will make a list for people of what I expect, but many times I'm like, look, if you surprise me and you defend it, well great, I'm going to come around to it, but you own it now you're the person who's going to drive this, because your idea was better than my idea, so it's. Now your idea. You'll get full credit for this idea, but you have to own it, you have to drive it and you have to show me you can drive it.

So, um, the things that I often watch closely but don't care as deeply about. These are things that I could do, but I found other people are much better at doing um. I like to talk about them, but I will often defer to the other person's job judgement because I feel like they're frequently better. They have better ideas or better implementation than I do. So, like I may want things for This includes, like doing the planning for the, game, doing the scheduling, um itemization, like exact itemization, which is below the level of economy, um.

Humor — I watch all the humor that goes in, but I love watching the narrative designers take things. And run with it and come up with things I never would have thought of that are just brilliant. So those three things tend — planning, itemization and humor — tend to be things that I watch, but I don't care so deeply about that. I've made extensive uh plans before people take over them. And then, finally, that goes the third category of things. I just delegate things. I'm like: okay, this needs to be done, do it I usually find someone who experience and work ethic I trust, and then I let them control it all. I say both of those. They have to be experienced in it, but I want a work ethic. That means I know they're going to stay on top of this. I know this stuff will get done. There's nothing more frustrating than having something someone has done before, having them say, yeah, I can get 10 of these things.

Done this month, and then they get five of them done and they tell you it on the last day of the month. It's just frustrating, because if you had told me you only had two of them by week two, I could have made plans for those last two weeks or we could have tried to come up with like: well, shoot, maybe we can get by with eight, but maybe we can't do five. We have to figure something out, so I look for people who basically know what they're doing, have done it before, so they can make predictions of how long it will take, and then come to me if there's issues — and I know that the issue isn't. They just let it slide and oops. So those are the people that I just give these things over to and they control it. Um, I do want to see what's going on. And I might have questions about it, but if we ever disagree about anything, you're probably going to win.

Um, usually this is a category of things like art or art adjacent, because these are things that I'm not, I can't do and I often find myself not very good at judging. This includes the visual design of the game, like concept, art um characters and creatures, uh, visible items like armor, um. But it can also include things outside the game, like advertisements, um, frequently it includes things that aren't art, um, but are narrative design, like dialogue, like I like doing lore and I like doing setting and I like doing story. But when it comes to dialogue, I'm not very good at it and I will almost always defer to the narrative designers. The only issues I usually come in and talk about is this: character doesn't feel right, or I said this thing to the character and their reaction surprised me. It wasn't what I was led to expect. I hope you were planning to surprise me, otherwise something's wrong with this character.

That's the kind of stuff I say. I won't come and go. I have a complete rewrite of your character. That never happens, so, um, so, now that I've talked about those two things, let me talk about one last thing. Uh, this is whole video about me talking about a situation where you get to decide where control goes, where you, by default, have 100% of the control. This is not often the case.

Um, even when you own an IP, you frequently have to find people who do things that you have no experience in. But even more frequently than that, you're going to find that you don't own an IP, and once you don't own that intellectual property, you're going to lose control, creative control — of part of it, even on the first game, and you will never have full control over it, ever and eventually you will have no control of it because someone else owns it, someone else paid to have it done. You need to accept that, and by accepting it I mean you need to do one of two things. You need to completely understand that this means your, that level of control you have will drop and eventually be zero, and you have to accept that and know that it will happen. Or you have to stop making IPS for other people, meaning you have to self-fund it or get into a position where you've done enough other work.

Maybe you've done a lot of. You put a lot of the game together, a lot of the code, a lot of the art that you can find a publisher. Who's willing to say, yeah, we'll publish this game and you can keep the IP because so much work has already been done on it.

That's rare, it does happen, but it's really rare. But I'm just saying you need to accept that you will eventually lose control of an IP you don't own. So accept that if you do own it, as I've talked about, there's some things you're going to want to relinquish control over to people, um, so I hope this video helps in thinking about how you would do that.
