+++
title = "Learning Lessons From Failure"
date = "2023-06-22"
id = "Kh5JMp5_5nQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Development"]
summary = "I talk about the lessons I learned from things that went wrong, which often taught me more than when things went right."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone, it's me, Tim, so I've been telling a lot of stories.

I'm gonna consider this kind of a summary video. So far, I wanted to talk about lessons I've learned, and specifically for this video, I want to talk about the lessons I've learned by failing, not by success, because I think I've learned more from failure than From Success. A very specific example of that is: Fallout was very successful in many ways, but I did not realize parts of its success that I just stumbled into or got lucky with, as opposed to things that I was actually good at. So I left Fallout thinking, for example, I wrote the intro cinematic, the narration by Ron Perlman, the war, never changes intro. It turned out people really liked that and turned out to be really popular. It turned out to be enduring, so you know, a couple years later, maybe more like three years later, when I started making tempo of Elemental Evil, I thought: you know what I'm — a good writer. I'm gonna write dialogue, new. I am not a good writer, or to be specific, there are some things I write well and some things I write poorly.

Short, specific, directed text, like in a intro to a cinematic, like portions of manuals — because I wrote portions of a big chunk of the Arcana manual. Um, some of the Fallout lore that you found, like the fev data about it being a viron — um, that kind of stuff I write well: dialogue, conversation, character. I do not write well, but I did not know that until I finished Temple and it got panned for its characters and I'm like: wait a minute, I thought it was a good writer, am I not a good writer? It took me years to figure out that distinction between I'm not.

Overall, I'm not a good writer, but there are some things that I write well. Learning that Nuance took years and took way took me Way Beyond the success of Fallout or even Arcanum. It took the failure of Temple before I even started realizing that there was a Nuance there. Another thing that failure taught me is that a team-wide acceptance of the vision of the game you're making is not easy to get and it's not easy to maintain.

Again. With Fallout I didn't learn that lesson because even though it was the biggest team I'd worked on so far, we all just sort of gelled. It was it. Everybody who worked on it kind of understood the direction it was going. Before then I had made games with very small teams. So either. Getting that Vision was easy because when there's only two people and you split the work, it your vision kind of dominates, whatever the portion of the work you're doing. It wasn't until Arcanum where I thought we were all making the same game and there was some fracturing that happened.

I'll do a video about that later. There were some really huge arguments that happened during the making of Arcanum with the same people I made Fallout with. So it took me a while — it took me years — to figure out, to tease apart what. What was the difference? What happened?

And the bottom line was: you may have an idea of what the game is, but it may not align with what everybody making the games idea is, and getting that Vision communicated to everybody and agreed upon by everybody is very hard. It's very hard that I understood it by the time I did The Outer Worlds and so I was much better equipped to talk to designers and programmers and artists about what we were trying to do. Related. To that, um, something that you learn after you have many games under your belt, some of which did well and some of which didn't, there's an old, I believe it's Roman, it's like thousands of years old. There's an expression that I did not learn until years later, called success has many fathers, but failure is an orphan. What this means is, when you make a game that does well, everybody wants a claim in it, everybody people will come out of the woodwork that you don't even know, that you've never seen before. Like who are you? Oh well, I put the second ad together after the game shipped, with the text: uh, you know, buy mutants or something on it, and you're like: um, okay, everybody wants a piece of something that they think is going to become a great thing, and that makes sense.

The flip side, though, is if you make a game that isn't good, people just walk away. People who would bang down your door, yelling at you for not saying their name in an interview, don't care what you say about the bad game. In fact, they'd prefer you not to mention them, even if they had more work in the bad game, so that's why I often tell people that Temple is my bomb. It's the lowest meta critic score of any game I've done, but I liked it I liked that game. I love d I love TableTop d It's a really good representation of tabletop DND. My writing is not good and that drags it down, and I get it. And had shipped with bugs. Almost all my games have out of Worlds, didn't it? But so that's why I learned: when you make a good game, everybody will be coming at.

You, and why don't you? Why aren't you mentioning me? Why aren't you mentioning — by the way, sometimes I flip this on people and go — I've never heard you once mention me. I've never heard you once give a compliment about anything I did. In fact, I backed somebody in the corner once and said: name one thing. I contributed to this game that I was just the director on, and they couldn't do it so you got to balance this.

Yes, everybody. It makes sense that everybody wants to be a part of something big, and they want to shy away from what they think are the problem games. But let me remind you the theme of this video. I've learned more about how to make good games from my bad ones, which leads me into the next thing I want to talk about, which is taste. Taste is subjective. It is for most of you. Hearing this, you're like, oh, yeah, of course. And somebody's going, no, I think it's no. But even those of you who think it's objective, you often don't act like it is.

I will get. I talk about this when I get feedback on my games and they say, well, this is dumb. Not only is that unconstructive — and I had a whole video talking about how that's stupidly unconstructive — but it's a taste thing. When somebody said: I don't like the look of this, okay, um, lots of people do, and I mentioned once, it's like walking to an ice cream parlor — a famous one that offers you know 31 Flavors or something, and saying, well, these are the only three good ones.

Well, obviously you're wrong, or they wouldn't have the other 28.. It's just the mind-numbingly large ego it takes for people to try to prove. That their taste is objective, just explodes my tiny brain if it's something where they're arguing about something which is a real thing you can point at, but some people just don't care about.

An example I gave in a previous video is you could be playing a game that crashes a lot, but other than that, it's a really good game. It's got super cool mechanics, it looks cool, you're having so much fun playing it, but then someone will go: it's a bad game. It's an objectively bad game because it crashes a lot and I've seen people go. I just saved my game a lot doesn't bother me when it crashes, I just reload and keep going, it's a super fun game.

And they're like: no, it is objectively bad. Crashes measured code, bad. I think they missed the entire point of what good and bad even is, and that it is very subjective, and I even imagine that there's gonna be comments for people when you no, it's not right, you're wrong, takes his objective. Crashing is objectively bad.

You're missing the point. You are completely missing the point.

Crashing is bad that doesn't mean the game is bad for everyone, don't know any other way to say that. Related to that, I quickly learned from failure that you're only as good as your last game. So, going into Arcanum, we were on that high of Fallout and then, after Arcanum, when we had Publishers come, they're like: well, you know, we're not really sure Arcane was doing that well, so we kind of we did two immediate contracts and we weren't exactly negotiating from a position of strength. After Temple went out — whoa, you know it got some bad reviews and I just slunk in.

To vampire and even told the other two co-owners, Leonard and Jason: look, I'm just gonna do code, handle HR stuff — because I didn't want to touch design for a while and that's happened throughout my career — that I used to just think it was really idiotic. LinkedIn recruiters that contacted me through Linkedin that literally only looked at my last game and would go, oh, I have a great programming job for you, I have a great design job for you, and not realizing: you know, I do both and I've done both for decades. Nope, they only looked up the last thing you did. People often do that just in general, so I'm only as good as whatever my last game was that I did. So if my last game wasn't good in their mind — see previous point about subjective taste. Being subjective, I must be on a decline or I must be. On an incline, or I must have lost it, or just a billion things.

Which actually gets me into my next point, which is the right people on the team can make all the difference. You know, I've worked on teams where there's different levels of ability and passion and buy-in on the team vision from different groups that are in the team and you can kind of see it reflected in the end state of the game. When people really care, like oh my God, they, like took ownership of some part of the game. You can tell because that game, just that part of the game, just feels really cool and really cared for in a way that's hard to put your finger on, but you're just like. I love this, whether it's dialogue, level, layout, lighting, how characters walk and animate it's, everybody has a different thing. That they like and that's reflected in the game. And because I make games with different teams, many of the games I make vary in different ways, like some people said.

Well, I really like the mechanics in this one, but not a later one. I really like the animations in this one, but not the later one. How did it go backwards or whatever? And I'm like it didn't. It just was done, made by different people who cared about different things and, again, because taste is subjective, they liked how that was. People thought this was a better way of doing things and some people agree with them, which goes me to my next point, which is related to the previous one, is: this took me a long time to learn and I I first noticed it at interplay and then it got reinforced every game company.

After that, I did not. Know this at my first company, Pegasus — that no matter what you do — literally no matter what you do, how you act, how good your work is — some people are going to like you and some people aren't. Often this has less to do with you than it does with them. Either there's some character or personality trait you have that they just hate and everybody who has that or something you did set them off and they can never see past that point.

See my video on nuance and how you view people. It's hard to tell why people do the things they do, which is why I try to avoid talking about why anyone does anything they do. I just talk about what they did.

But I have learned that there are some people I'm never going to win over, and other people are going to love me. No matter what I do, and they're at the end points of a continuum, with a lot of people in the middle, and you just have to accept that, that you're not going to win some people over and some people you're never going to lose. Which brings me the last point of what failure taught me, and I will say right here: I didn't learn this lesson until Leonard barski crystallized it by telling me this phrase. He said: Hey, Tim, everyone is the hero in their own stories. Once he told me that I looked back at how people talked about events in different games I made and yeah, you know that sometimes they talked up themselves and I thought that's what was happening.

They're like, well, the game is really good and they want to make their contribution seem important. But then I realized that just when people talk about themselves, they're always the good guy, they're always the one who tried to do the right thing. They never flew off the handle, they never said a bad thing, they never intentionally tried to hurt anyone.

Yet those things happened, and when Leonard told me that I I thought, oh yeah, everybody does that, I do that I. When something happens, I I don't try to think of myself as being the bad guy, even though I want to tell you about some of the arguments that we got into at Troika in a later video. I know I do that a lot.

Sorry, I just can't talk about everything in one video. Every time I look back on and like I'm not proud of that. I think I might have even been on the wrong side of that, or at the very minimum, I just didn't need to care about what we. Were arguing about as much as I did. I should have just let it go and go. You know what? Honestly, I don't really care.

Let's just do what you want to do. I don't care, don't? I don't care?

Um, it's not the part of the game I'm throwing my passion into. I shouldn't say I don't care. There's never been a game I've made where I didn't care.

Just I threw my passion into different places. So I try to combat that tendency. Now that I'm aware of it and I know that everybody wants to tell a story and make themselves a hero, I try to combat that in several ways.

First of all, I've got all my notes and taking notes since interplay. I don't have much notes from Pegasus. I have a lot of notes from graduate school that you wouldn't care about, but ever since interplay I've been taking a. Lot of notes on things. I use those notes to try to ground me. When I do look up things in my notes I try to ignore if I wrote down the why someone did something. I just care about the what, so when I report events and when I talk about things here, especially if I talk about someone else, I say what they did. I try to say why they did it I don't try to guess their mental state or what previous events led them to do that. I just say this person did this.

That's kind of the pros and cons of that is. The pro is you can't argue that they didn't do it. The con is I do avoid trying to dive into anything that makes them. It make it more personable for them, because I feel like I can't now that I understand this bias going on. I don't.

Want to make them into a villain. Similarly, I'm not prepared to make them into a hero, so I just try to say this person did this. Similarly, I try to take blame for the things that I did wrong and I've done that in multiple videos where I said I did this wrong. And I notice and get suspect when I'm talking to someone who never seems to have done anything wrong.

They're, they have this blameless career, like they worked on a game but all the basketball that game, but that wasn't them. So that's something I really. I listen to that now, especially when people do interviews. I'm like: does this person ever do anything bad?

They're always on the, they always made the right decision, they always pulled things out. That was amazing, everything they did, and then the final thing I've been doing and I've learned to do: this: I didn't want this to turn into a chat Channel, but I've noticed that when I bring people on — like I've had Leonard on twice and I brought JT on last week — it kind of keeps things real and keeps things grounded and gives me that other perspective into the same event. Because, like I said, Leonard and I left a meeting once, and so the meeting had literally just happened and we both had a different interpretation of what someone had meant. When they said something like what you know, I thought they were mad and throwing something out and I was like, no, I didn't get that at all. So, having people on to talk about things, especially a long time ago — in you know, Fallout was 20, 28 years ago, well, and it started development — almost 30 years ago, so having other people on, here to talk about that is really important, because I want that other perspective, even if I don't agree with it. I'm glad to hear it because I've come to realize, hey, even with notes, everything I'm saying may not be the perspective that most people had on those events.

So so, how do I wrap this up? I started this off by saying I learned way more about how to make good games from my failures than my successes, and I think the general rule here is: when you do something right, you don't always know why it's right, but when you do something wrong, you get a much better idea of how to do it right, and I think that's true for a lot of things. For me, it was certainly true about making games, both design and code. So I hope some of those lessons are things you guys can learn. A little easier than how I did.
