+++
title = "It's A Great Time To Be A Game Player"
date = "2023-10-09"
id = "KNhdh6QxPs8"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Industry"]
summary = "I talk about why this is such a great time to be a game player."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about why this is such an amazing time for game players doesn't always seem that way, but I'm gonna lay it out.

First of all, there are amazing games coming out. I'm not going to list them because for each one of you it's different. It's because there are so many games coming out that there are good games for you. Not every game will be for you, but there are games coming out today are there are games coming out today that child Tim could have only dreamed playing in the 80s?

There are fantastic consoles. The PS5 and the Xbox series X are really powerful, amazing consoles. There are amazing ways of getting games. I mean, you all know what steam is and steam is great and steam has great sales and it seems a great way to have a huge library of games.

But you don't have to have them locally. But you have the epic game store, which literally gives away free games every week — really good games you have, good old games, which is preventing a lot of older games from slipping away into unplayable obscurity. All of these are great ways of archiving your library. In case something happens to your computer or, you know, the disks become unreadable, which used to happen with the old floppy disks and even CD-ROMs now. Yes, there are so many good games out that you often have to dig to find them. I call this the signal to noise ratio getting too low, but it's. But that's the negative way of looking at it.

The positive thing is it's because there are so many games. There's a surplus of games, a virtual Cornucopia of games, it's. There are so many out there and yet I see people getting jaded about the industry, and yes, there are some things that are valid. To be getting jaded about. Microtransactions are becoming common. I don't want to say they're frequent, but when they exist there's no longer any uproar about, I'm thinking, yeah, that game has things you can buy with Microsoft. There's also a lot of DLC that comes out that you're like this looks like it should have been part of the game and instead it got carved out and turned into DLC like it wasn't. It didn't look like it was made separately from the main game.

And don't even get me started on anything that's pay to win, where you can spend money to get anything. That's not cosmetic, if you, if you can spend money to get skills or better weapons or better armor, that's not cool. But I see a lot of people getting upset about the fact that games are out that have a political or social or moral belief, that isn't reflecting how you feel, and all I can tell you is that's always been the case. You're just seeing it now because there's a lot more games out there. But that's the good thing. You can just buy the games that if that matter to You can just buy the games that reflect your own beliefs back at you. But I like the fact that that diversity inside games has become so Broad that if you want to play someone who looks like you, who talks like you, who acts like you, can find a game that does it. But another reason I wanted to talk about this today is there has never been a better time, an easier time, to interact with game developers as there is right now.

I'm not talking about me, although this is true for most of my career. You just couldn't leave a comment and hope that. I reply or even do a whole video about it, um, but there's other developers who are doing that as well, that I'm not the only one here on YouTube or on Twitch or Discord who are doing things like this. You basically have never had more bandwidth into game development and game developers than you have right now, however, there are a lot of game developers who don't want to do this now. There are some that can't either. They work at a company that's like your NDA covers everything that you would ever want to talk about, but there's a lot that don't want to do it because this particular situation can quickly become toxic. And I'm not even talking about most you.

It's just a fraction, but you know I used to go to game forms a lot more 20 years ago, because it was a great way of interacting with fans who were really into the games, so I appreciated the knowledge and the perspective. I guess now that we call it the lens — the lens that they have on even my own games — was very educational for me. I learned what people really liked about my games and what they really didn't like about my games, and both of those can be constructive. However, now when I go to forums, it's usually just the absolute loudest voices in that group declaring that what they know is right and that everyone else is stupid, and I don't know what they hope to get out of that, because that certainly doesn't make a discussion happen and it certainly doesn't lead any game developer to go. Now I know exactly what to do in my game, so that's just kind of a waste of time, and that's when I declared several when the signal to noise ratio drops too low, that's when I tap out, but it's funny to me the lack of self-reflection that some people have, because I've seen people complain about video games where all the NPCs are snarky and they think to themselves snark is not a replacement for a personality and the first thing I think is you just described a lot of game forums and, by the way, I've had this discussion with game narrative designers, with writers who seem to think the only way to write an interesting character is to write a character who's a jerk to the NPC, and you see this happen all the time. I think it's inexperience, because I see it more in junior narrative designers where when they're asked to come up with an interesting character, it's usually a character who's super sarcastic and is exists, seems to exist in the game world. To give the player the what for, and they think, wow, that character has got a lot of character and I usually just think this is the 19 000th time I've seen someone write this. It's actually really boring, so you can only imagine what I feel like when I go into a game development board and there's somebody being snarky and I think, wow, that's super original. I've never seen anyone make sarcastic comments like that before.

Wow, so what I see it really happening is there is an incredible wasted opportunity on a lot of boards, channels for actually having a real discussion with game developers, which has never happened before. It does not happen before in this industry. It's happening now because of the vast nature and variety of discussion platforms out there. Twitch is a little different than Discord, which is different than YouTube, which is different than any other kind of social media that's out there. They're all have their pros and cons, but it lets you basically listen to developers and give feedback. And, by the way, while I'm on the topic of feedback, let me just remind you it's a lot better to tell developers what you want them to do then what you don't want them to do. I know It's easier and it feels cathartic to go.

Your NPCs are stupid and your combat is dumb and I hated your combat and your crafting was the worst thing I ever saw. Blah, blah. What's a lot better because that doesn't tell them what to do, it just tells them you think this stuff is dumb.

Um, if instead, you said I wish there was more, there was more choices I was given in dialogues, and that those choices mattered in the game I wish. That there was more crafting with things I'm already finding in the world. So I wish weapons and armor could be broken down into materials that I could then craft with, because I'm already finding those and sometimes I want them and then I don't know what to do with the ones I don't want. That is a lot more constructive than just saying, uh, their crafting is dumb. But all you also have to bear in mind — because I know, the price of games is becoming a talking point lately, which is surprising to me, because games cost about 60 or 70 dollars now and they used to cost that much 20 or 30 years ago. I don't know why. This is the one thing in the world that isn't being allowed to gradually increase in price, or, in the case of food, not so gradually increase in price but just keep in. Mind that when you ask developers to do more and more features, you have to accept that it either means there's going to be less of other features, or it's going to take them more time, or they're going to have to hire more people, which basically translates into more money, and eventually that's going to be reflected in the price you pay for the game. Instead, what I'm seeing on almost every form of social media that game developers go to, I see mostly Rants and tirades from people, which basically translates into fewer developers doing this.

I'm not even saying it's all of you. I'm not even saying it's most of you. In fact, it's a tiny fraction of you. I will admit.

People leave the most wonderful, amazing comments on my channel. I love the fact that my games have gotten you through rough times. I love the fact that one of my games is the first thing you remember playing with your one of your parents, or it's the first time you felt like you really got into a game, or it's the most memorable game for you, or you discovered one of my games and then you wanted to play a lot more because they have a similar Vibe.

I love reading that, but then there's a few people just make a bad situation because it seems like all they want to do is go into a board and rant and I'm not sure what I'm supposed to do with it. So I'll be honest, I usually just ignore that stuff because I don't know what I'm going to do with it. So I look at it and like this guy's having a bad day and I toss it. But one thing I always want to remind people is a lot of bad situations in the world were created by a few people who do this.

If you wonder why you get so much spam in your email? Because you never, you know, answer spam. Well, a few people do, and because those few people answer spam and it pays off. We all get a lot of spam.

It's like what happened with the airlines in the last 20 or 30 years used to be: you got an airline, you had a pretty decent seat, you got fed a meal, even if you were back in coach, you could carry on bags. But what happened was — especially after people could look for prices online — is people always went to the lowest price and Airlines discovered: well, if we got rid of all these things and then put them back as added fees, we're getting more people because people only look at the lower price they don't think of well, yeah, I won't get fed on the plane, so I'm going to be spending 20 bucks at the airport for a really bad Burger beforehand and I'm gonna, I wanna, I don't want to check my bag anymore, so I'm gonna have to rush on to try to stuff it into an overhead bin rather than have it checked at the gate, because I don't want to pay, you know the 20 or whatever. So it's led to the airline having this menu driven thing that was created by a few people driving the airline into this situation that now we all live in.

So I'm just trying to say, if you step back and look at the huge breadth and scope and depth of video games available today, they're amazing. This is an amazing time to be a game player. Yeah, it could be better. I hope I've explained some things you can do. To help make it better, but let me trust me, almost everything used to be worse. There used to be a lot more horrific games that you didn't know were horrible until you plopped out your 60 bucks and got them home. This is awful, there used to be a lot of games that were you know you.

After you got home, you found out it was a great game, but it was two hours long or it didn't run in your system. But the store doesn't take it back because you broke open the packaging. I mean steam now lets you return things after you've played it for a while.

This is a great time to be a game developer. I mean, it's a good time to begin developer, but it's a great time to be a game player. It's really good. Um. I'm telling you this to encourage you to enjoy. The games that are out there that you can find that obviously are for you, and then, in the places where you do have bandwidth with game developers, take advantage of it. Every game developer — anyone - wants to be a better game developer and you can help them.

Yelling at them is not going to help them. Being constructive, telling them what you like and what you wished, the systems that you didn't like what you wish they could do. That is way better and in the long term, we'll reward you with much better games. So I hope you're excited about all the games that are out now and you take more advantage of active game developers who are available online.
