+++
title = "How To Make A Good Game Setting"
date = "2023-06-10"
id = "kW7gOPHmr-Q"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Worldbuilding"]
summary = "I talk about how to make a good setting for a computer game, and more specifically, what questions your setting should be able to easily answer."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about how to make a good setting for computer games.

I'm not going to talk about the structure of the design document. I want to talk about, like, how you actually develop a good setting, and this was actually really hard for me to do. I, I started and stopped writing down things about this video several times because I wasn't sure how I did this in the past. I — I don't want to say I — stumbled into a good setting. There was obviously a process I went through, but it wasn't necessarily conscious. I likened it to excuse me, when you ride a bike or when you're learning to need bread, you know when you've reached a point where you can stop needing it, but it's really hard to describe. I've seen people talk about pinching it and stretching It's like for me, it's like you're needing it and then you, it feels a certain way and you're like I can stop, kind of like making a setting for a game. I work on it and it gets a certain way and I'm like, okay, that's a good setting.

Excuse me, I I thought about it this way. I've restructured this discussion into here's a series of questions you should ask yourself about the setting you're making and you should have good answers to these questions. And these questions should not be hard to answer. If they are, or the answers aren't quite that good, rethink.

And this is important and I've talked about this with people when I work with them. People get an ego attachment to things, in a sense that they create something and they think it's perfect and wonderful and you're questioning it is somehow an attack on them. If you get into that mindset, you will not be able to be a good designer. I'll just say that if you think everything, that comes out of your head is brilliant and requires no critique from anybody, you're wrong and you're going to see that as I walk through these questions.

They're kind of like poking at the setting you just made. So let's start with the very first question I have about any setting, and that is: it easy to explain to someone in a way that they grasp the setting, they understand what you're trying to do, they can imagine it. That's why, in the video I talked about how you write documents, the very first one was setting and I said different people will read these. That setting document is usually read by everybody, including the publisher. They may not dive into your mechanics, but they're going to read that setting document and they're probably going to have questions. So you have to make it something that when people read it they immediately go.

Oh, I get this, and that's why elevator pitches exist, where an elevator pitches a very short description of what you're trying to do. I mean, the elevator pitch for The Outer Worlds was Fallout meets Firefly. That wasn't even for me, that came from one of the founders of obsidian and we ran with it. But it's great because it's short and it makes you go. Okay, I think I imagine I know what that would be if. If you can't describe your setting very briefly in a way that makes people go.

Okay, I think I get that. Your setting may be too complicated, it may be too or too niche, but we'll talk about you know your target audience later. So then the very second question I ask after I'm like: okay, I get your setting, I get it — is: can you tell an interesting story in this?

Now, bear in mind — and this is something we go over with every narrative designer — we ever work with um, and when I say we, it's because I always think that with Leonard or Jason or the people that have made stories with, the story in a video game is not linear, it doesn't have to be. In mine they aren't, and non-linear means you can set up the chapters that you want them to go through, but the method they go through, them, is entirely on their own. Uh, we talked about how players are never do what you think, but sometimes those chapters can be in different order. They may go, you know, go to One location before another and you're just thinking, okay, I'm gonna have the story handle them, doing this part before this part, and then I'll rewrite dialogues to handle this part for this. Part, but at the very high level.

Are you even telling a story? That's interesting if the setting is, you can make a setting that's easy to understand, but there's really no interesting stories in it. The setting itself is interesting, but does it? Can you think of narrative? Can you think of how the player would go through it? That that makes it sound like that's what they'd want to do?

Um, part of that for me — and this is personal — is the setting reactive, so as the player does things in it, people change, situations change, so now some events are possible and some aren't. As their, the player's own personal story, personal playthrough of a game story, unfolds. That's important too, because that's something that only a video game can do.

A book can't do that, if I read a book and you read a book, it's the same book. We may bring our own perspectives to it, we may have draw different conclusions about why certain things happened or why characters did what they did, but you and I read the same book. When two people play one of my games, they often have very different playthroughs, and I love that, and because of their different playthroughs they think differently of different NPCs, of different events in the storyline, especially if those events are major and have major effects in the world that then come back to the player. So you want to ask yourself: is your setting open enough to have that kind of reactivity?

Very specific, to video games and related to, but not quite about, the story is: can you come up with interesting quests to do in your world? Excuse me, it's been raining a lot here. If you make a world that has lots of fun things to do. That should correspond to quests that you and your quest designers can come up with that are interesting for the player to do. If you can't come up with those interesting quests, if everything in your world is: go talk to Bob, then go talk to Mary, then take this widget to Susan. If that's all of your quests, I don't think you have a very interesting setting. You certainly don't have an interesting story.

There should be things like you have to go resolve this situation, which may involve talking to a lot of people, finding evidence, maybe you kill a few people, whatever. Whatever way you go through that, but that should be an interesting Quest. Have a to me of an interesting question: figuring out how I want to solve it. When I'm LED through a quest, it's like: oh, go talk to this person, then take this widget to this person. And then kill this person and then go back and tell everybody: you're done.

That kind of bores me, so if your world supports a lot of different kinds of quests with their own Solutions and reactivity, you're probably on to a good setting related to that. Do you have interesting characters in your world? Do you have a literally interesting NPCs? Whether they appear in cinematics or you can interact with them, they should be really interesting. I've seen games that and — and some of them are good — where there's no other NPCs in the world. These are often puzzle games, but I see people make RPGs that there really aren't anybody else to interact with. Because of that, you lose a lot of depth in your game, because NPCs are there to help Advance the story, to show reactivity and also just to be really interesting, and they help. Refine what the setting is because they're telling you things in The Outer Worlds. We had the companions chatter all the time to you and because you could have two of them, they'd often chat back and forth with each other and that was a great way of doing World building, because they would say things you might not even think to ask or you may not be noticing, but they notice it, they chat about it. You hear that and you go: oh, that's interesting, it's, reinforcing the setting through the NPCs. My next question about your setting.

It's hard to be specific about it's hard to be concrete. But is your setting evocative? Meaning, if you describe your setting to someone, okay, we've already established they can imagine that world.

There's an interesting story, there's some quests, it's got reactivity, but do I actually want to play in it this? Is different for different players but in general people want to play in a world that somehow draws them in lets them invent a character, a Persona to play in that world in a way that's interesting to them. Evocative settings are hard to create, mainly because you don't want to lead the player through the nose and say: look at all these, look at this interesting, look at this one. They want to this one, look at this one. They want to find these things, but you, have to make it so that they want to go find those things. The world has to be a little mysterious, unknown, maybe a little scary. All these are things that draw people in and go. I want to know.

Fallout thought people often go. What do you think the draw of Fallout is? And they used to say: well, it's a big world with.

No laws, so players can do whatever they want. But there's also that interesting. You search through it like: what would the world be like after a nuclear war? No, weird animals, radio radiated humans going through the ruins, it's just there's something evocative about doing that, about wandering through the remains of our civilization. The next question only matters if you care about sales or demographics or the reach of your game or if any of those things are imposed upon you by the people who gave you the money in the first place. But that is, how mainstream is your idea?

Fallout, Arcanum — we never asked that question. I've heard people say they're cult classics. I know they were Niche. We didn't design them for the audience. We never really thought: what are people going to think of this? Who's going to care about this? Who's going to want to play a? Game? We were just making a game for each other.

The The Outer Worlds was not made that way. One of the things I was told at the very beginning was: we want casual players, casual RPG players to 1 to play This changes things. It changes what you put in the game. A lot of people spend that as: oh you dumb, that you dumbed everything down.

No, you can have. Things are just as complex, whether it's the story or the setting or the mechanics. You just have to kind of lower the slope. I tried to explain this.

One says the view from a Mountaintop is just as gorgeous, whether you climbed up Rock climbed up that mountain or drove up in a car. Yes, there are some people who say, well, I'd appreciate it more if I rock climb to the top. Okay, I appreciate it more that I can.

Drive up and enjoy the view without risk of death. So if you ask yourself that question at the beginning, you might design your setting or your story or your mechanics slightly differently so that it is easier to get a broader Market interested in what you're doing. Once you've got them, you can start introducing much more complex stuff. But it kind of means you front load things that are more mainstream.

I've talked about the book. I I love Lord of Light. Part of the reason I love it is it starts like it's a fantasy novel and you're like, okay, I'm gonna read a fantasy novel. Then it turns into sci-fi. I love that, I love it I love that about the book and some of the stuff it investigates about the meaning of identity is really interesting. But it doesn't front load that and I think that's important.

If you know who your game is for. Finally, um, one of the things I want to talk about — because it's come up in the questions — is: I want to talk about the evolution of these things. I told you, like Fallout, Arcanum, when we did not think about the setting, how it appeal to people. We liked it, so we did it. But when I talk about, when you write this down, when I talk about these documents, I saw some comments: people know documents, or so, 20 years ago, we don't do that anymore. You do. Don't take me literally and say this is a Word document or a printed document. It's not what I meant, when I first started, we had no documents at all.

People just tell you what they wanted and you'd code and if you had any questions, you go back to that person's office and go. What did you? Want?

Later, by the time I did ragsy riches, I mentioned that I would get design documents on napkins. Because I'd be at lunch with Tom the producer and he'd write it on a napkin and I'd go back to my office and go: okay, this is what I have to do.

By the time we got to Fallout, yeah, we were writing things down, but it was loose. There wasn't a main design document. I can't hold up a Fallout design document because I don't think there was one.

Arcanum was different. We had to go to a publisher. We had a very big, thick design document, but we did it in word. We gave them printed copies, but we did it in word. I mean a tracking turned on, because later we changed things and I'm going to go into a whole video later about the massive changes Arcana went. Through before it shipped.

Not all good, but that evolved over time. So finally, by the time I did The Outer Worlds, the design document for that was a hierarchical, interlinked set of Confluence pages. So you would go and it would be like here's introduction to The Outer Worlds, and then you dive down: here the system mechanics, here's combat, here's melee, here's two-handed, mainly with hierarchy like that, but within that would be links to all kinds of things. I'd be saying like Melee as opposed to ranged. Here's a link to range uses, these rules, um, here are the formulas, these rules we use, and it goes off to another page: here the items that this, here the skills like you use in melee, and here are the items that use those skills: Link.

What's great about that is, though, Confluence Pages automatically track changes so you can look back at earlier versions. But because they're living documents that anybody can look at any time, if you have a meeting with a programmer and say this is what I want melee, you added mailing skill to be like, you can then send them the page and he can read all about two-headed melee. He can read about the context of it is an inside of combat, he can read details about to edit melee, the items that are going to be marked as two-handed melee weapons, and it just informs their code. I would highly recommend that even your setting documents be done like this. If you don't have access to Confluence, do it in word, but keep tracking changes turned on. They will change as you ask these questions and you get answers and you're open to get that.

Like I said at the very beginning, don't be too attached to anything you make. You will make changes and you want to track those for two reasons. One, it's interesting to go back and look and see what a chain what changed.

But frequently people go wait a minute, why don't we do this? And you're like, oh well, we used to do that and if you look you can see the comments that people made and the reasons we changed it to this new way. Especially as people come on projects late, they may also they may go.

Well, how come your setting doesn't include aliens? Or why doesn't your setting include hyper-intelligent AI?

It's like: well, we've made this conscious decision in the setting document. You can go read about it, so I think that's most of the ideas that I have. On process, like I said, I mean I started doing this back even before d I made board games as a kid. The process of making a setting is hard. For me to describe, but I think these questions will guide you into making a good setting, so I hope that helps.
