+++
title = "Character Build Fairness"
date = "2025-03-10"
id = "mbMAufVe_ds"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about character build fairness."
references = ["SmYBsCOp-OY", "vlkksy6casU", "phMzoU7DOFA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about character build fairness.

Now let me give you some context. I got a question from a viewer, JP valheim, who asked about fairness in video games and I replied that I wasn't sure what that meant in the context of mostly what I've made, which are single player RPGs. And I said, outside of accessibility features and making sure that any character build that the player makes can finish the game — that I didn't really have an answer and he replied, and I quote: you mentioned single player games and the fairness of any build being able to complete the game. Could you elaborate on why exactly it is so bad if a certain build cannot complete the game? I would argue that it's not the build not being able to complete the game. That's the problem.

Rather, the players do not enjoy restarting from scratch. That is the true origin of the problem. Well, let's talk about that. I think you're not wrong that a lot of players do dislike restarting from scratch, um, but I think there's some other issues going on. I start by saying it's my belief. Maybe other people don't share, but my belief is there's a pack between the single player role playing game designer and the player, and that pack is: I will give you tools to make any character you want, and if I do that, you should be able to finish the game with whatever character you made using those tools. Meaning, if character creation lets you make a certain kind of character, you shouldn't discover halfway through the game that that character cannot finish.

And also, by finish, I'm very specific. What I mean here. I mean the main story arc, um, and I'm even talking about, if the game lets you keep playing past the end of the story arc. Maybe things will get difficult there, uh, but I'm talking about: can you finish? These series of quests that consist that make up the main story arc? In fact, I have a video on games that don't have endings, that you can finish the main story arc and they keep going.

I'll link it below. I'm also not including side quests. I think it's perfectly reasonable to put side quests in a role playing game that not every build can do. In fact, I have a video Below on multiple Quest Solutions and I you should watch that because I I call out that on games where I was the director or the lead, I made sure that the main story Quest could be solved by all the different kinds of characters we were supporting. But for the side quest, I'm like if only a few of them can, that's fine, as long as it's not the same few every time. If we have a lot of quests, that require Combat Characters to do, then I want some talking quests, I want some stealth quests, I want some leader quests, so things like that.

Now let me be clarify what I mean by completing. I do not mean it will be easy, I just mean it will be possible — some builds that you can make — and by that I mean not only during character creation, but as you level up and you make changes, if I. I think, if the game allows it, that that character should be able to finish the main story quests, but that doesn't mean it's not going to be incredibly challenging to do so with some characters versus others. Also, some of those builds will require the player, not the character, to develop certain skills. Maybe they need to understand the minutia of rules because they've made a character that is really good at doing something but they're not doing. It, or they're not doing it right or they're not doing it well. It's possible you're just not playing that character very well. Also, especially in combat, you often find that you may make a character that has to play very carefully and tactically, choosing where they stand and what weapon they use and what kind of defensive and healing items they have, or that sometimes this character may just need to run away from some fights, that not every fight is winnable by the character you just made.

This is on the player to understand. Once given that, I would say okay, if the player is playing that way, any build should be capable of finishing the main story Quest. Let me clarify, too, exactly what I mean by not being able to finish. Here's some examples I've had in games of people not being able to finish.

If there's a required combat, so there's. A combat against a character that you can't avoid. There's no talking past them, there's no stealthing and they're on the main story arc, so you can't like choose a different path in a nonlinear game and you never encounter that character. So if there's a combat and it requires high combat skills — not that you're good tactically, but that some skill needs to be really high — similarly, if there a dialogue that is required to advance the storyline and it has a very high dialogue skill requirement, imagine a door in a game that has no key to find and requires a 100 lockpick skill. So many builds you make won't be able to do that. Why would you even design that? Why would you put that in the game?

A lot of you would be like I would never do that. But then they do it with either the dialogue path or the combat. Path and they're like: well, you know you're going to have to fight. If you have to fight, then I would say you need to change your character creator or the level up uh system to force that if. If you think that combat is required with a certain skill level, you need to force it. You need to force that to happen.

I don't know how you do that, because that's not what I do and I have gone through my own games and tested them with very tough builds and I also — I would like to point out that — had a really, really good tester — I've mentioned this before in The Outer Worlds, Taylor Swope, and he made a random player character generator where it would tell people in QA, make a character with these attributes and then this is how you Lev them up. And then in the game, this: is the things you have to do, just to make sure that the game was finishable when someone played that way. But I myself have played my games with many characters that were really really hard to finish with. In the original Fallout I made a low intelligence, a one intelligence character. Ostensibly I wanted to see the funny dialogue, but because — because - because Fallout had your, the number, the, skill points you got when you went up a level was directly proportional to your intelligence, that character got very, very few skill points and therefore got to the end of the game with very low skills.

I think you have to. It's proof that you had to specialize, because if you just had a bunch of skills at 20 or 30 something, it was really hard but it was doable, it could be done. Proof I did it I have made other characters for. My other games. I made an all talk character.

All he had were di was dialogue skills. He couldn't fight, he couldn't stealth, if he couldn't talk his way around to combat he had to run away. I made, and then I made a variant on that where it wasn't dialogue skills and this is obviously the The Outer Worlds. He had leadership skills so if combat happened he relied on his compan companions being good.

I've made characters that only have one skill that I put points in um Johnny, one skill, I forget what it was I did. I've also made in games I had where you could make a group. I made them all one class. I played tempo of Elemental Evil with an allb and also happen to be all halfling group. It was very, very difficult to finish that game but it was doable and I picked BS because they felt like one of the weaker classes to me. They were good at lot of different things, but not great at any one thing.

I finished um Bloodlines as a Nas veratu, which was annoying because later on, a map got changed after I had played through it that changed a teleport location, so the game literally shipped, not being completable by Nas veratu, which is why test plans are super important, if you're, if you're, if you're getting a theme out of this. I love playing flawed characters. I love playing characters that have a major disadvantage in their character design. That makes the game more challenging. I love doing this.

Sometimes it'll be like I'm not going to pay attention to where quest Quest markers are, or sometimes, uh, I'm not allowed to run. But there are also things like this where it's like I'm just going to play a character that can't fight. That has very few skills, because I want to see if the game can be finished that way. At this point I should probably mention Respec, respecing a character midgame, where you're allowed to throw away some or all of what you've decided on in the past and resend your skill points, reselect perks, do whatever. This is relatively new in RPG design.

You didn't see this in, I want to say, any game 20 or 30 years ago. If you did, it was very few and it's become a lot more common now. Personally, as a designer, I feel this is kind of a Band-Aid because once it's put in a game, you don't have to worry about being able to finish with a particular kind of character. You can always tell the player: well, just Respec, just go, respect your, character. The problem is, once it's added, players expect it. And there are a lot of, I think, people who play single player RPGs now that expect respect because they, as the original poster said, they do not wish to restart the game to experience it differently. They've already got a character who's played through the game a little bit as one way. They just want to spe and experience a different way. That's okay. To me, that's like autom mapping or fast travel.

If you added it because players expected it and your game is designed for it, that's fine. But if it's added because you feel you needed to add it and then the design subsequently, you're like, eh, I'm going to go ahead and make characters that can't finish. I think that's bad, because you could have made it so characters could finish, but you — and that's not why you added Respec, though you added it because you expected it, and now you need it. So, in summary, let me just say to the original person who asked — as I developed as a game designer, I recognized that there was a PCT between me and the players — that it would be a bug — a design bug, not a code bug — if a character build couldn't finish the main story of the game. And this bug is as bad as any crash bug, as bad as any, you know, reduced frame rate bug. It's just happens to be a design bug and not a code bug, and I think it needs to be fixed, because one of the mantras in my games is: do whatever you want. The game won't necessarily make it easy on you and there will be — there will be — re reaction to what you've chosen to do, but you still can do it and you can finish the game with that, and I think that's just. Something that I think designers should have, that agreement with players of single player RPGs. So I hope that answers your question, JP valim.
