+++
title = "Why I Don't Review Games"
date = "2023-06-11"
id = "mFZSt3TaE7Q"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life"]
summary = "I talk about why I don't review games on this channel, and as an aside, why I am not talking about The Outer Worlds."
references = []
+++

Foreign, It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about why I don't review other people's games and, as a quick side note, why I haven't been talking about The Outer Worlds very much, so real quick in the The Outer Worlds. I'm getting a lot of questions about it, but I've told you guys I'm working on The Outer Worlds too, so I'm a contractor with obsidian to give them consultancy on that game's design. Many of your questions are things like: what do you wish wasn't cut or what would you do different?

Now, knowing what you know and looking at the reviews, what came out? I can't really answer those questions because that's exactly the thought process that goes into the sequel and I think some of you know that. So by answering those questions I'd be literally talking about the sequel. So The Outer Worlds has to wait till the sequel comes out.

As for other people's games, I don't really want to do that. Um, it's not what this channel. Is about. It's not something I think I'm particularly good at.

There's a lot of other channels that do it and do a really good job. So at the end of this video I will list some other channels that I watch that I think do really good jobs of reviewing Games, books, movies and TV shows. But I can tell you that I'm good at analyzing games as a game developer would be, not necessarily as a reviewer would be.

In other words, when I play a game, even today, it's hard for me to enjoy games. Um, I do, but it's hard for me to enjoy it like I used to, because I will be playing a video game and I analyze every detail of it I look at the level layouts, I look at the mechanics, I look at the UI. Sometimes I even find myself critiquing the music and sound effects. It's because, once you're a lead, and especially a director, that's what you spend years doing with your own game, and it's hard to get out of that mindset with other games, which isn't necessarily the right mindset to be in to play and enjoy a game, because it's very harsh. Um, because of this, I can't even enjoy shows about video games or based on video games.

Ready Player one: I liked the book, but when the movie came out, I found myself going: that's not what development's like and that's not how that would be. It's I don't think that's where VR is going and it's just. I found myself double, uh, questioning everything in the movie. I watched the documentary on double fine, which I highly recommend. Uh, you can find it on YouTube, however, some things that happened, that would happen to me, some of the things I saw people doing. I was like, oh, they should be doing that. Somebody needs to step in and correct that behavior.

It was just hard for me to enjoy it as a viewer, having been in situations very much like that for years. Similarly — um, I won't go into jail — but like I literally could not enjoy the Halo TV show, I just couldn't do it. There were too many things in there just gonna go, um, um, part of it was being a game developer, but part of it was being kind of a fan of the series and I was like this: why did they make these decisions? So I don't want to review those. They made those decisions.

Let them do it, let them do their thing, but, like I said, like the first or second video, if you don't like something, don't watch it, don't play it, don't. Buy it. That's the easiest way of going with these things.

Trust me, if you vote with your money, people will pay attention. Sorry, we have a lot of pollen in the air and it was just devastating me. So a side effect, by the way of me analyzing stuff is I was very good for most of my career at playing what are called gray box levels early on in development. You often put together a gray box level and that are levels where you're testing mechanics, like maybe you have jumping or parkour or you have some combat mechanics and you want to test them out before any of the Arts available. It's called gray box because the level is usually filled with cubes for houses and objects, cylinders for props — um, if there's any creatures at all, that's often just t-posed people and you're there basically to test mechanics or layout.

And say, oh okay, I like how this town is laid out. You know, I can see where the general story is. I can see where the quest givers will be. I've worked, though, with so many people who see past the gray box if you give them a gray box level. They were complaining about everything. This is horrible. I hate it.

The mechanics are terrible, but if the art was correct, they would suddenly love it was frustrating because it meant you couldn't present anything to these people who were in decisions or positions of decision making until you had a lot of stuff done, and then, if they didn't like something, there was a lot of stuff to redo. So being able to play a game, a prototype of a game, at graybox is a skill and I recommend if you're making games — especially if you're an Indian — making your own games. You need to get good at that, because you don't want to do 90 of the work before you discover some of it isn't good. So I've mentioned it's hard for me to enjoy games. I find myself frequently going back to games I played 5, 10, 15 years ago because I can just get back into enjoying them right away I can.

I described it to someone once as it's like macaroni and cheese. That is not a healthy meal, that is not a good meal, but there's something comforting about it and because of that there are some games that I played a decade or two ago that are discomforting for me to go back to. Frequently when I'm playing games, I start redesigning them in my head. Um, especially newer games I'll be playing and I'll be like, oh, that's not a good UI, it's You really should have done this other. Thing, especially if it's I'm having trouble with it because I'm colorblind. Frequently I'll come across a mechanic and go: that mechanic isn't good. You know, if you just change this and tweaked that, that would be so much better. And then that's all I can think about.

Especially every time I use that mechanic, I'm like, oh, it would have been so much better if they had done this. I frequently do that with games that offer bonuses, perks, advantages, whatever they call them. I always go: oh, I wouldn't have done prerequisites like this, or I would have made this one, uh, prerequisite for this one. So you have to buy them in order.

Even recently, I found myself just taken out of a game because of its sound effects. There was a game I was playing and I stealth, killed someone and the sound effect was so dumb. It was in no way a sound effect that belonged in the game and it was just ripped out. I was like, why did I buy that perk, that let me do that, because every time I do it I'm gonna hear that sound effect. I'm going to be ripped out of the game. So that's, just a problem, that's I. I bet you that people have been writing for a long time have trouble enjoying other people's books. They probably rewrite characters and dialogue.

Um, movie directors probably can't just sit down and enjoy a movie. I'm sure they think in their head: oh, I wouldn't have included that scene, or I would have shot this from a different angle, or that character should have done something else. I get it, you, just I don't think you can do anything for decades without getting into that mindset. So that is my very long-winded. Answer for why I'm not going to review movies, Games, books, TV shows. So let me tell you how I select review channels to watch a lot. I watch a lot of review channels and I'm going to tell you what my favorite ones are because I feel I told you I love to watch how to drink, which I do, and I don't even drink much, I just it's an entertaining show and I love hearing about where drinks came from and what a good drink is versus a bad drink, which I know nothing about. But I do watch a lot of review channels on gaming and movies and books. The way I find those channels is: I already know how I feel about some games, books, movies, shows, so I find a reviewer who's already reviewed them and I kind of agree with how they review them. I agree with the highs and lows of each one of those entertainment products and then I feel like, okay, I can trust this person when they tell me about something I haven't seen or have played or read or watched, that I probably have the same opinion.

So I'm going to give you. I've got five channels spread across all those different kinds of entertainment products and they jive with how I enjoy them. So the first one is, if I want to know more about game development, I love Matt Barton's Channel.

I've been on it, but I I watched it before and I've watched it since. It's really interesting to hear other game developers talk about how their careers went and how they made their games, and you know Matt's been doing this for years. He asks really good questions, um. I can't tell you how sad it is when you have an interview. And they ask you: I could tell you the same five or ten questions: what were your Inspirations? Why did you decide to do this? What games do you think are similar to your?

It's like um. I'd rather just not do an interview like that than just repeat it at every interview. But Matt asks really insightful questions and he's obviously played and enjoyed the games he's talking about. The other game channel I love to watch is mortisemal gaming. I think I'm pronouncing that right.

I've been watching that for a couple years. One thing I love, about his channel is he frequently won't talk about a game until he's played it 100 percent, which is brilliant, because some games start off slow, some games are great and then have really bad endings. I'm glad that he waits and enjoys the entire game before he talks about. It.

Moving on to books, and specifically science fiction books, I love a channel called Quinn's ideas, specifically because he really deep dives into some of these books, like, if you like, Dune — and I'm rereading, Doom right now, because I haven't read Dune since I was a teenager and I feel like I didn't appreciate it, especially after the recent movie. Quinn will deep dive, so far into these books that I find myself going onto the web later and reading more about it, because he's touched upon a lot of things I never thought about, um, or knew about or remembered. So if you love The Deep Dives, I recommend Quinn's ideas.

But another uh book channel that I've really gotten into recently is one by Jared Henderson. He talks a lot about philosophy, but he often, very frequently, talks about fantasy and sci-fi books and what I love about his channel. Is he is way, more insightful than I will ever be. The man can think, but he also is really good at explaining his thought process. It's not pretentious in any way. He's incredibly well educated, but the channel is by no means pretentious. When he does a list of, like his favorite fantasy or sci-fi novels, I find that I've read most of them and I agree with what he's saying, so I immediately write down the books that he likes that I haven't read because I know I'm going to like him. And then, finally, for movies and TV shows, took me a long time to find a reviewer. Who paralleled my own thoughts. I would frequently watch a reviewer and then he'd love some movie that I hated, or hated a movie that is one of my favorites and I'm like okay, but I finally found a reviewer: Eric Kane. He writes for Fords but he has a YouTube channel and we're not related, even though my family did spell my last name with a K six Generations ago.

What drew me and he did in The Outer Worlds review — and that's where I started watching, and that was three or four years ago — but what really drew me in is when he started reviewing TV shows and movies and I went, oh yeah, those are, I like those shows and he liked them too. And when he doesn't like a show, he will let loose in a way that I probably never would, but he's usually right, um. I still remember watching The Lord of the Rings TV show and kind of going, hmm, jumped onto the channel and he very explicitly listed things that were bothering me, some of which, subconsciously, were bothering me and I wouldn't have been able to. To so eloquently put, into words what have been bothering me. I just was like, and he would say it, I'm like, that's it. So because of that, I often watch his channel to see what he thinks about shows and movies I haven't watched yet, because I I know it will align with probably how I feel and it helps me weed out stuff I don't, I I don't. There's so much stuff coming out that I just kind of want to avoid things that I don't like. But I don't want to be a professional reviewer and I don't want to be a. I don't even want to live stream me playing. I don't think I'm that interesting when I do it. So anyway, I will put links to my favorite review of entertainment products down below, but I hope this helps and I hope you realize I'm Not. Really Gonna become a reviewer in the in the future.
