+++
title = "Organizing Game Code"
date = "2023-10-11"
id = "mmt9mB7HAwU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Programming"]
summary = "I talk about the stages I go through in writing code for a new game."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about how I structure code, and I don't really mean like I'm going to break down code into structures.

I'm going to talk about how I do the code for a game in stages. When I do it, what I do first, what I make sure is done first, it'll be. It'll make sense when I start talking, which is right now. So, first of all, I don't start any code until enough design is done, and whether I'm doing the design or someone else is doing the design, you shouldn't rush in and start code until you at least know some basic things like: how big are your Maps gonna be? How are you going to be traversing them?

Do you want buildings and dungeons to be instanced or not? Are we going to support flying or swimming, like really fundamental things like that that the designer probably can just go. I got the answer for you. I mean, it'd be great to have it written down with design. Pillars, but before you do anything, I like to have some really fundamental information like that decided on the next thing that usually gets done.

I haven't done this in all my games, but I think I've done it in every game I've made since 2004.. So I've been doing this for 19 years.

You make a simple level — we caught it I considered the level of units. You basically make a level which anyone can go to — artist, programmer, designer — and see what your game's expectations are in terms of its most fundamental units. For example, you may have a ledge and that ledge is labeled: this is the highest ledge that the player can jump to in a state while standing, you know, and land on their feet. Maybe it's a, you know, lower than that, and then there's a higher one saying: this is the highest ledge that a player can jump up. To and pull themselves up to. You may have an. You may have a event and say this is the smallest, lowest vent that a player can Crouch and move into. You may have like a bar and go: this is the lowest bar a player can Crouch to move under. You may have a spot for the player to stand and then have a creature and say this is the farthest away a creature can stand and still be hit by a player here with their mail it melee weapon. You may have an example of a ladder. You may have an example of stairs. You may have an example of this is the steepest angle that the player can't move up.

You put all these in for a couple reasons. One: you want everyone to see what your limits are. So that way, if an artist is making something and you know like this is a canyon and the designer said you can't climb the walls, he knows how the well it wasn't going to be perfectly vertical, they can be angled, but he knows how far the angle can be before it becomes something the player can walk up. It also lets you see things. Sometimes you just you just need to see how far away is the farthest person I can melee and you may go. I think that's too close. I think we want to make melee have a slightly longer range and sometimes it just helps to have one of these unit rooms to do it. And you want to make that soon because some of these will change as you're developing. But you want them locked in as soon as possible because if you change, the highest distance you can jump to or the steepest angle. That the player can still walk, if you change that later in the game, lots of stuff has to be changed, so you want to do that soon, then the very first thing I always code is just someone moving around the world, walking, running, whatever — and this is usually just with terrain — you - this is the time where you decide — is the speed approach, feel appropriate the Viewpoint, how high up above the ground I am, what fov we're going to pick us to fought? A lot of these are pretty standardized now, but they didn't used to be, and even then people still argue on what a good speed in fov should be.

If you saw the Fallout demo with the Knight walking around the trees and the flowers, that's perfect example of one of the very earliest things I did. Even before there was, I think there were only two people on The. Fallout team besides me — the two jasons — and that was made just because we I wanted to knock out.

This is what isometric. This is how far the camera's pulled back. This is how fast the person walks. This is about how big trees and terrain objects will be. The next thing you do after making that is you start on more complex Terrain and putting in, like the Steep mountains. You actually put in some mountains and some Canyons, water pits, and then you walk around that and you see how it looks like.

How. What does an open pit look like? Is it easy to see as I approach it? Does it? Can I? Can it? Does it visually make sense? Here's a pit I could jump over. Does it make sense when I'm doing it? If not, you may want to go back to your unit test and say this is how far.

The player jumps and you may want to pull it in a little bit. The next thing that tends to be made — and by this time you have other people on the team — is you ask for things like props. Props are trees, shrubs, ground clutter, ground clutters like grasses and flowers that you move through. Props are not intended for the player to walk on or for NPCs to walk on. They can have Collision. They can have attachment points, like if you want to make a tree and there's attachment points where birds will land here and then go off, you can put that on a prop. If you want trees to block the player, so the trunk blocks the player, but maybe the branches don't. Props can have Collision volumes. Some props have no Collision volumes.

No shrubs you could just walk through, maybe grass and flowers, you just walk. Through, maybe they detect the player and do a Bend or whatever. So it looks really cool when you're walking through the grass, but they're not intended to stop you.

The next stage you would do is you'd code structures. Structures are intended to be walked on and not just by the player. You expect players and NPCs to walk on them. So not only do they have Collision, but they have pathing for the player in the NBC to walk on. These are things like buildings, especially, if they're not instant, so you can walk into them, be on the roof, be on second floors, ruined buildings, um, maybe big boulders or outcroppings, ships, boats — you know, start plate spaceships, whatever you're making in your game. Also, structures include things like Dungeons, because they have pathing and collision. The only difference is this is a structure.

That you tend to instance into, and remember, one of the first questions you asked your designer is: are we going to support instancing and how often are we going to instance? So you should already have that question. So now, when you make these structures, you should have a good idea of, roughly maybe, how big the biggest extent they will be, whether they will instance from level to level, or you need to be able to support those levels, um, how big your pathing Miss may be, because these are all things you're going to need to know as a programmer. The next thing I do now that I've got all that stuff done, I try to handle instancing, which is the entering and exiting of different Maps. Um, sometimes the map is a pure structure, like a dungeon sometimes, or ship. Sometimes it's going from a Terrain area to another. Terrain area because you go through a mountain pass and it's an instance into the next Zone, which then brings you to Maps. Now your game has to support Maps. How are you going to allow travel on them? Are you going to do fast travel? Are you, um, do you always instance when you go from one map to another? Or you ever have two maps that are stored separately and but you can go from one of the other without an instance?

Are you going to have a really big math that has to be streamed in sections because it's so large? You get that worked out. The next thing I tend to do code wise is support basic exploration. This means the player can now move around this world, jump up on things. Maybe there are switches that can control doors or Gates or, um, draw Bridges.

So now you. Have things that have like: here's something that has collision and pathing, but it changes its location. You have activatable items in the world that have to have a state. You start to add items in the world. So now there's an item, now the player can pick those up. Oh well, now you need inventory and containers so you can have chests with items. And then that leads you to putting in creatures, because creatures have inventory too, so when they you kill them, you can loot them. Oh, but now there's combat and now there's vendors. It very rapidly, when you start exploration, grows into all the other areas: combat, uh, Merchants, um, dialogues with people. So at this point UI tends to begin in parallel and grows along with everything else you're doing.

Usually it starts with: hey, can we get a Simple Start quit menu? Can we get some settings? Menu? Because already early in development people are going to go? Could I have settings to make combat easier, harder or turn it off and things like that? There's often settings in early games that go away.

They're not shipped, they're not intended to be shipped. Um, some of those are put in consoles and that's that way you can eat triply. Hide it when the game shifts by disabling the console. That's why so many games have console activation.

At this point you start thinking about load and save, both how you're going to handle it and what the UI is going to be like. Some maybe load and save is done at checkpoints. Maybe you can load and save anywhere. Maybe you can load save anywhere as long as you're not in combat. These decisions have to be made, so load and save can be programmed and the UI made for it that makes sense: inventory UI, looting UI — because, remember, you've now put items in the game, people are going to want some way to wield them or carry them around. You start dialogue, uh, bartering — all those are for you are things that you need.

Now that you have creatures in the game, you want to be able to do more than just fight them. AI to control all this has to be done. This is the stage where it really tends to go boom, and all these things are now being done in parallel, so it's hard to say this one's done before this one.

So the last advice I want to give I'm going to talk about when I actually write code. There's a couple things that I want to talk about. One: I have five functions that have appeared in every class — class or module, depending on what code you're doing. Basically some unified set of methods and variables. I'm going to just pretend I'm talking about C plus So for every class I always had five functions. I call them init, reset, exit, load and Save.

Here's what they're for in it is what's called on that class when the game first starts — not a new game, just a game. You, when the game begins up, it calls that class and said you need to do anything. This is something that's if in C plus would be called from The Constructor. We didn't have Constructors in C so I just had a function called init. Then when I started writing C plus frequently my Constructor just called init. Exit is the same thing, except when the game shuts down it had it caused everything says hey, if you had memory, if there's file handles, just you got to release those things. Those are usually called from.

The destructor in C plus, then there's that — the other one though that I mentioned in between: reset. Reset gets called whenever the player starts a new game Within the game. So when you stuck new game from the main menu, it calls reset and all those things. So basically it means if you exist class, you have to reset yourself to something fundamental, because maybe somebody's playing a game like I don't like this, I want to start a new game. So you clear out the quest log, you clear out their XP, you reset all their attributes and skills. That would happen in the reset for those classes. I know a lot of people don't have that. What they do is they destruct all those things and then construct new ones. I didn't like doing that because that often fragments memory badly.

It's not as a big, biggest of worry now. It's a huge. Worry for most of my career, and then the last two were load and save. Load and save were basically methods that would be called on your class when a save game is occurring and would usually handle, hand you a file handle and say whatever you need to save, after this file handle, but save it in a way that when I call your load you can load just what you need and leave the file handle set to just pass what you had. So what it tended to do is: let's say you had three variables you wanted to save, you would write out. If you knew there was always those three, you would just write, them out, boom and then the load would read them in: boom. Simple, but unless you had an array and you weren't sure how big the array was, what you do is: you write out the size of the array, like there's five things in this one. Then you read in those five values and that's how you'd save it, like that. And then you'd read it. You read a number, go, I've got to read five things, boom, boom. Well, you initialize the array and then put the numbers in. I did this because frequently the person who's the programmer tasked with load save doesn't know how to load, save every single thing in the game. He doesn't know how to load and save a dungeon or a creature or a creature happens to be a merchant, you know who. Inventory may have changed dramatically. You know there's a lot of things that are different per group. So I let the person who made that thing handle the load save and all they knew is: I got a file handle. I'd handle the. Low tape, and then what was what's great about that was later on, when we made loads and saves that went into a Data Bank of loads and saves you could get. You were getting something that looked like a file handle and acted like a file handle, but you were actually writing into a database.

And then, finally, the last recommendation I have for programming is: I tried to keep my method small, hopefully fitting on one screen — and I know that's vague because you may have a higher resolution screen, but that's the point. If you can see your entire function or method on one screen, I think it helps with the coding process. I know I broke that and something like pillars where I said I had a switch statement that was, I think it had hundreds of entries and it was just a giant switch statement with hundreds of case statements, not proud of that code, that was the first thing I told Brian McIntosh. You might want to refactor that on deadfire, but I try to keep my method small. If a method gets too big you can often think about why is it so big?

What's it doing? How can I break this up into smaller methods? And I would use — and my battery gave out in the middle of that, but I was at the end, so I hope that answers a lot of questions about how I organize and begin coding a game and a little bit about how I literally structure code, and I'll keep an eye on my battery level in the future.
