+++
title = "Anemoia"
date = "2025-07-23"
id = "MsZtvrDgKtg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Worldbuilding"]
summary = "Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about anamoya, which is feeling nostalgia for a time and place that you've never known — And yes"
references = ["MiAEBpXlelk", "3KMUaVsp9Zs", "kNpSGR7bRW4", "z8Vx8eBr0KU"]
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about anamoya, which is feeling nostalgia for a time and place that you've never known — And yes

, I had to look that term up. You see, I watch a lot of documentaries. What would be a Tim Kaine video without a story? So I was watching a particular documentary on Roman buildings that have been continuously occupied since they were built centuries, millennia ago. And it was just really interesting to me because I — I I don't really, you know, want to live in an old Roman building, but it was an interesting documentary And they were showing different buildings and showing what they had originally been built for and what they were be being used for now and how much of the original uh architecture was still exposed, because sometimes they had been plastered over And also some of the buildings were used for different things, but a lot of times they focused on buildings that were still being used for exactly what they had been built to be. And they happened to mention a building in Capidoshia, which, of course, made me think of this. But I suppose I should thank you. After all, it led me to my true calling, Ceil.

No civilization in history has ever considered chief hydraological engineer a calling, Yes, The Capidoshians, Fine, Yes. Pretty much Capidoshia has been ruined for me by The Simpsons. But what was interesting is I still felt, watching this documentary, a weird longing towards this time and place that I'd never experienced. And this happens a lot.

Old books do this, Movies do this? Disneyland does this when you walk down Main Street. I've never lived in a little town like that, but that Main Street, the look and feel of it, brings back this weird quasi nostalgia. And so I looked it up and it's called Anamoya And, by the way, I have a video on learning. Uh level design from Disneyland and I'll link it below. I don't do a lot of videos on Disneyland, on uh, on level design, because I haven't done it much, but I did do that one.

Anyway, I would argue that all these things — the books, the movies, Disneyland, these documentaries — they're really talking more about setting than story. And if you remember when I tell you to make a game, you have to go setting story system mechanics, At least for RPGs. That's how I do it, and in my games or in these novels or books, I see people imagining themselves in the setting and they live there and they're living their own story. But they're in that setting, and that's what I wanted to talk about today, because I think of every form of entertainment that gets offered to you. Games probably create this sense of anamoya more than just about any kind. Of entertainment, because it's interactive. You can kind of live in that time, You can pretend. And the games I make I like to let you create your own story, or at least a main story line that's highly reactive to how you behave. I I know when I did my video on what it was like to play games in the 80s — I'll link it below: Um, a lot of people commented that even though they never experienced gaming in the 80s — and some of you the '9s — you still feel sort of wistful about it. That's anoa, and I think a lot of games do this, especially games in medieval settings, even if they're not fully fantasy, although that's fun too. But just going back to what life was like 500 years ago, a lot of people have romantic notions about what that's like and they have this longing.

That'd be fun to live. In that in that world, well, probably the one game I've made that seems to create this sense of anamoya in the largest quantity is Arcanum, because Arcanum was set in Victorian times and it's kind of an idealized Victorian era. I do have a couple videos I want to point out at this point. If you want to know more about what I'm talking about and you haven't played Arcanum, I have a video called research that has a whole section on the research I did to make Arcanum. And then there's another one called Arcanum lore explanation on stuff I want to deep dive into. If I ever went back into that setting, It's stuff I'd want to deep dive into.

But in any case, Arcane was full of stereotypes. It was. It had the positive stereotypes, like you know, being a noble person, or you know the exciting rise of industrialization and suddenly all these cool gadgets and trains and everything are available to the common people and, unlike magic, which arcanum made a very strong dividing line between anyone could take advantage of these things. Anybody could ride on a train where if you wanted to be a wizard, you had to spend years of study and all that to really learn how to use a wand. But Arcane was filled with a lot of bad stuff And people have talked about this. You know we mentioned, you know, slavery and we did racism with the actual race, fantasy races.

There was also a ton of classism. You know, if you go and talk to any of the noble people in that, they will really look down on you. And so will city folk versus town folk, solo shopkeepers, and this was something that you got reactivity to from a lot depending. On what, how you made your character, and I like that. But also when I was doing research to make Arcanum, I found all this horrible, stuff about the Victorian era.

The two I remember the most — and I I think I mentioned this in the research video — were the phosphor girls. These are young girls that were poor, usually orphans, and they had nowhere to live. So not nice people would take them in and make them put to make matches to sell on street corners. And matches had to be dipped in phosphor and then dried. They didn't provide them any drying rack. So they would just hold them in their mouth between their teeth while they dipped a whole bunch and they'd have a bunch drying in their mouth. That phosphor would get in, would leech out into through their gums, into their bones, and dissolve not just their teeth but their entire jaw And then they couldn't work anymore and they'd be on the street corner begging And they were known as the phosphor girls.

That's horrible. I mean it gets worse. Chimney sweeps, you know, had to go up and climb in and out of chimneys. They had to go down into them with the with their brooms and their brushes. And the soot was so bad during the industrial age that they inhaled it and it got on them and it went in through their skin and it caused horrific cancers, In particular for chimney sweeps test testicular cancer. It was really bad, so I researched this stuff. I not all of it made it into Arcanum, but a lot of the bad stuff did. But still people play Arcanum Like, oh, it would be really nice to live in that world, would it, Anyway?

So I wanted to make ad give some advice for. Game developers, if you're planning on making a game, and you're hopefully doing it, if it's an RPG, you're going in the order I said and you're thinking: I want to think about my setting You should really think about how you want to play to nostalgia. How do you want to make a world that people will really want to be in? And, of course, usually this means making something set in the past, because it's hard to be nostalgic for a future setting, Although technically, anamoya is longing for a time and place you haven't experienced. So I think you can have anoa in the future as well. I'm not saying you have to, you know, change everything you want to do to play on nostalgia, but you should at least consider it. And what I find great about it is it lets you make social commentary without people getting worked.

Up about it. We, made social commentary all the time. Fallout and Arcanum are riddled with social commentary but you usually don't find people calling it woke or whatever they complain about these days, because we tried not to be overly obvious about it And when we were even being obvious, we didn't lecture people. People aren't playing games to get a lecture, They're there to play. So we filled up Arcanum and Fallout with social commentary but most of it was like adjacent to what really goes on in our world And it wasn't enough, apparently, to make people not feel this wistful longing to be in these games. And I think if you're going to make a game and you want to have the player be able to make their own story, like I did, and have it be reactive and nonlinear, and all of that your, goal is to make.

A setting that people will feel wistful about, They will wish they could exist in whatever time and place your setting's in. And that's called anamoya And that's something you should strive to evoke in your players. Hope this helps.
