+++
title = "Troika Memories"
date = "2023-07-19"
id = "mzNnpgWaaFU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Troika Games", "Storytime"]
summary = "I talk about fun memories of Troika, so that viewers don't get the impression from my other Troika videos that we were constantly stressed there."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I wanted to reminisce about Troika.

I've talked about the projects we did there — ironically three of them — Arcanum, Temple of Elemental Evil and vampire bloodlines, and I know when Leonard and I talked, it just sounded like Troika was so incredibly stressful. And it was, and I'm still trying to figure out how to talk about work-life balance versus passion. But I wanted to talk about how fun frika was, and I start off by saying, yes, I've worn this shirt before, but that's because what I wanted to wear from Troika wasn't a shirt. We were originally wanted to make something besides the shirt. We would talk about pants or shorts that had a Troika logo embroidered on them. We didn't want to do a hat or a hoodie. I forget where the idea came from, but we had an idea, and even Sharon Shellman, um Jason's wife and artist on Arcanum and handled our HR and finances, agreed. This was a good idea, so we made foreign boxer shorts.

With the torca logo on them. Silly. I still have my pair. I don't wear it anymore because Where Are You Gonna Get Troy a box of shorts these days?

I thought it was funny. Um. It kind of was what Drake? It was like this way: no gaming with this game. Companies went this way.

Turkey was a little this way. Um, like a lot of startups, we started we didn't intend to start. After we left, we actually looked for jobs other places. We finally started our own company. We worked out of our homes while we shopped around our design dock and even after Sierra we signed a contract — it was on — had a 90 day. We had to deliver a demo after 90 days and they could cut it off at that point. So we still worked out of our homes. We found we finally found a place, um, through one of the guys we wanted to hire, Mark Harrison, his cousin, did business, property, real estate, uh, buying and renting — and through him we found a place.

Some company had a office with a big warehouse behind it. There's like a bunch of offices, um, and then there were two doors that opened back into a warehouse and they had the place next door and they didn't need that many offices, but they needed the warehouse. We needed offices at nowhere house, so they rented it to us. Now, when we saw it, was a mess. It was basically, there were stickers on everything.

One of the bathrooms was just a nightmare. So we hired a professional cleaning crew to go through and they steam cleaned the rugs and they scraped all the stickers off and cleaned the windows and cleaned all the bathrooms. And all the floors and everything, and it was really cool. It had a huge conference room, it had showers, it had a full kitchen. In fact, we renovated it so nicely, that the people next door came over and looked at it and they liked it so much they wanted to use that instead of their place. And we're like: well, we just paid rent for a year and after a year they didn't renew and they all moved over there and we didn't want the offices next door, so we went somewhere else. Um, but that was funny, that was kind of like how Troika things went. They were just we moved to three offices in what?

Seven years? So every other year we ended up moving. And after the second, when we went to the second place, I finally decided I wanted to get a dog and. I went to an animal shelter. I wanted a lab, but animal shelters are full of three kinds of dogs, mainly German shepherd, German Shepherds, pit bulls and chihuahuas. I saw a ton of those and mixed breeds. I ended up looking at a mixed breed German Shepherd that seems super nice. He seemed well behaved.

At one point I asked if he was okay around kids, because we, some of the people at work, were starting to have children and well, they said, look at them. And some little girl had walked up and was hugging him and he was just sitting there. Totally fine with it.

He was really bad with other dogs though. He was very dog aggressive and they said he'd been found living on the streets for six months. He smelled horribly. I remember I adopted him, I took him back to work with me and everybody was like I thought. You were getting a lab and also your dog smells. I took him to a professional groomer.

It took three tricks before he stopped reeking so badly. He had trouble eating. It turns out the enamel on his teeth had worn down because he had so many fevers, probably from infections. They found a BB lodged in him. He was terrified of teenage boys so I wonder if he got shot with a BB gun from a teenager.

But he loved it. At Troika he was nervous for about a week or two but he absolutely loved that place and everybody would come by and pet him and talk to him and people brought him toys. Um. One of our QA people, Tiffany, she brought him one day I I came back to my office and she was rubbing Evelyn and Crabtree cucumber lotion on the dog's paws and I'm like what? Are you doing? I mean, this is a dog that was living on the street a few months ago and she goes, why his paws are so rough? And he was just sitting there like is it nice? And I mean he grew to love it. We used to call him the VP of morale. He would some. He usually sat in my office but he learned to go to a programmer's office every day for a treat he would bring. He'd bring in Milk Bones when that programmer left and a new programmer was hired. That programmer hired uh, called me one day on the intercom and said your dog's in here staring at me and I said: oh, there should be a box of Milk Bones on the bookcase behind you. Just give him one here. And then the dog came back and he said okay, and I said oh.

That's going to happen every day. Um. We had our own daycare center. People started having babies and, uh, Sharon's — I think it was Jason's — sister. We hired her to run a daycare so people could just bring their kids in with them, see them throughout the day. And it would be because the second place we hired had a small Warehouse area in the back but we weren't going to use it, so we just decorated all out, we put padding everywhere, kids, toys, you know, play things — and the kids just weren't there.

And it was great. Um. We had a whole bunch of things happen during each project that, I just remember, is super fun, like in Arcanum. We went to an old bookstore — several of us — to try to find inspiration for arcanuman — the two coolest fines we found. We found a yearbook. I think it was 1910, for a college in the Northeast of the United States, I want to say in Rhode Island.

I thought I had It's not in my bookcases here. It must be still packed away. These people should have been 20, very early 20s at the latest, because it was a college yearbook. They looked 40 if they were a day. Lots of layered clothing like sunken cheeks and eyes. These people had been through some stuff. I know Leonard used a lot of that as uh templates for some of the portraits. Well, some of the portraits are based on photos of us on the team which I'm sure you've seen online, but some of them were taken out of this yearbook. We also found an old Sears catalog from the early part of the 20th century and we not only used that as inspiration for images but we use it for how things were written. I mean, this is when Sears sold farming implements and medical things like trusses. It was a crazy catalog, basically, if you could think of it I think they sold houses. They got shipped to you by train and you had to assemble them yourself. It was insane, and we used that for a lot of Arcanum inspiration. Um. We didn't have cable, but we had an old TV with an antenna and it could only pick up these odd local stations, and one of them we'd stop every day at 4 pm and watch a half an hour of a Chinese soap opera.

Now there were two people on staff who spoke Chinese, but they both spoke Mandarin and this was not subtitled, because all Chinese is written the same way but spoken Cantonese, Szechuan, it's all. It sounds different, so nobody knew what they were saying, but I still remember the main.

Character was a mean looking lady with long fingernails that we called Dragon Lady, and then it was either her husband or her son. We could never figure it out. He was super mean unless she was around. And then he was really Meek and he wore this big hat that looked like it was upholstered and had a button sewn in the middle. So we caught him button head, and then there's this other woman about his age. I don't know if it was his wife or sister, I don't know — but she had long dark hair.

But one day she left — oh, whatever was really mean to her. And one day she left and she walked up a mountain and then you didn't see her for a few episodes. And then when she came back she had long white hair and everybody was scared of her and they'd scream. Even Dragon Lady seemed scared, of her and we're like what is going on and we never knew. But we watched every day at four. It was a great break, especially when you're working 12-hour days.

We also, when Arcanum shipped — I'm sorry, when Arcanum went gold there was a big delay between it going gold and shipping and every I've recounted elsewhere — we were told we couldn't make a patch. Um, they, didn't want us to start a patch until they approved what was going in the past. So we had several days where we had nothing to do but they wanted us to be at the office in case they called. So we would just play Counter-Strike all day. And there was one day where Libations may have flowed and we were trying to play Counter-Strike and apparently I was shooting my teammates, and eventually I think Steve Murray came out of.

My office and said: what are you doing? And I said, well, I'm gonna go over here and shoot anybody who's not me. That was my Counter-Strike plan, so that was that was odd.

Um, when we started temple, was such a rush job — I mean, it was originally 18 months and we did it in 20.. But we still played D every Wednesday for two hours at the very beginning, I'd say for like the first three months, because we wanted everybody on the team to not only know the rules and the vibe of Dandy but to kind of understand what the tabletop environment was like. So we tried to replicate that Temple, and you can be the judge if whether we did it I think, rule wise, we did a great job. And then, finally, on vampire, I don't have a whole lot of memories. We were all you.

Know, crazy crunching by that time. I came on two years into it or 22 months into it — um, not a whole lot that I remember. And also Sharon left at that time. So in addition to me, um taking over programming, scheduling and AI, especially for bosses in vampire, and doing some of the bosses, I also took over HR and all the accounting stuff that Sharon used to do. So my days were full, but not always a vampire. But I remember the third and last place we went was really awesome. It had a wrap around wall with exits from offices into a garden. So we just leave those doors open on nice days and the dog could go out there.

Sometimes he'd go out my the door in my office, go around the corner and go in someone else's door and just hang out with them for a while. We also had a huge patio back there with a grill, so some nights we just go, hey, if people want to stay, we're going to grill out — uh, burgers and dogs — and I think we did other things on that Grill it was — and we just basically say we're gonna have dinner here tonight if anybody wants to stay. And it was fun, it was very family-like. It was in a way. I know people are thinking, oh my God, crunch mode and overtime and all that, but people were really into it and I've had so many people tell me that was the high point of their career and I know our work life balance wasn't great. But be darned if it didn't feel really good. I mean we were stressed and but there was just something about it and it was, um, those games became really something.

I know, Leonard, and I joke that. They're called cult classics. I don't know how much of that was Troika culture.

Oh, so that was just. We were young and passionate and didn't know better, didn't know how to edit ourselves. But I just kind of wanted to point out that, for all the stress and craziness, Troika was really fun, and I'm not just talking boxer short form, I'm talking we had a good time. Yes, we worked hard, but it was a really fun time in my career, in my life. So I hope you like that glimpse into the brief seven year lifespan of turkey games.
