+++
title = "Creeping Normality"
date = "2023-09-02"
id = "N3mX9ySWz6o"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "I talk about creeping normality, or how people push against the defined limits of a design in order to deliberately change them."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about creeping normality.

It's not the name of my favorite band. It's not the name of a new game company I'm starting. It is a term that means getting major change made to Something in small, tiny increments. This is not the same as slippery slope, which is a argumentative fallacy where people assume that if you let one little thing in, it will lead to Major unintended consequences. Creeping normality is a deliberate thing that people do where some limits have been defined on, like a Min and a Max of something, and then you push, or other people push on the limits of those, usually the upper limit, trying to get something just past it, and if they do, that moves the limit and then they do it again and it moves the limit and it does again. That's why it's called creeping normality. In politics this has been called the Overton window, which means politicians often see certain topics of as being too conservative or too liberal for them to discuss with their base, but over time that Overton window can shift, Often by introducing things that are near one end: introduce a pretty conservative bill that's at the limit of what people accept, or a very liberal bill at the limit of what people accept, and when that gets accepted, you wait a year or two and then you can push something more. The overturn window is a little different.

That's why I went with creeping normality. Creepy normality is something that I've seen in game development a lot, and that's why I wanted to talk about it here. When um, every game I've worked on has had this. I particularly see it, though, when I'm in charge of the design, so I saw it on um, well, Fallout, I was kind of the last word on the design and then sought in Arcanum, saw it in Temple, saw it.

In um WildStar, sought in The Outer Worlds. So I'll talk, I'll give some examples for those of those. But what I'm saying is tends to happen — and if you work in a group you will probably see this happen in your group — a designer has an idea and they really want it in the game, even though it doesn't quite fit. They do one of two things: they'll modify their idea, so it's just within or just outside the limit and they're trying to get that limit changed. Or, more frequently, what I've seen people do is they're pushed for something near the limit that's not their idea. Until it gets accepted, then the limit can be moved up a little and maybe they'll do something else, and then the limit will get moved again and they suddenly say, well, here's my idea for this thing that they knew wouldn't have been accepted.

Six, months, eight months before, because now they've normalized what, or they've changed what's normalized in the game. I've heard this referenced by some of the old writers who worked on The Simpsons. If you watch the first season of The Simpsons, Homer's not as dumb as he has, as he is mean, and in the interview I saw — I think it was within with Conan O'Brien — they said somebody, some designer, wrote in something and the producer pushed back and said: no, that's too stupid for Homer to say but what happened was something else dumb was said for Homer and it got a lot of good feedback. So then, when they introduced what you know again, what they wanted to say earlier, it suddenly wasn't too dumb and they were getting a lot of laughs on it. So suddenly Homer saying all these dumb things. So Homer shifted from the kind, of mean, aggressive, angry father into just really stupid father and that's a good example of creepy normality.

But I want to talk about what I've seen happen in with creepy normality in my own games. Um, Fallout is the one I want to use, because a lot of you play Fallout. In the very first game we had Mr handy, we had the — uh, Robo brains. This was something that we saw as what a robot should be like in Fallout: a very big, chunky, clunky, Treads or floating on, you know, a Thruster, very mechanical, very simplistic. No chance that this thing you think this thing is sentient. It's a very robotic robot. We used Forbidden Planet as a touchstone. That was Robbie the robot. But there was a programmer Who Loved a designer Who Loved Terminator and Terminator 2 and he really, really wanted that kind of skinny endoskeleton.

Robot and he kept trying to introduce it and we kept pushing back and I finally had to tell him: no, that is not Fallout, it doesn't fit the fall of aesthetic. And then later the newer Fallout came out and they had endoskeleton bots in Fallout 4. You run into one right when you go to Diamond City, Nick the, detective bot. Then you find out they have synths which are supposedly undetectable.

It's kind of vague and needed test them like couldn't you just cut someone's arm off and see the robot part inside? But it didn't matter at this point. Endoskeleton robots have been normalized into Fallout. This means the limit's been pushed, now more modern tech can be added, especially because if you look at what the Institute added into Fallout 4 with much more modern tech, you can point to that and go: well, there could. Be even more modern tech than that at some point. If this continues, it really won't look like Fallout anymore, it'll look like some other game. But it will happen slowly and that's why often I found, as the game director, I had to be the bad guy and go: no, we're not going to do this.

No, because you want to keep those limits constrained. So your game has a theme and a tone and a style. A perfect example of this — and I'm glad I already talked about the design dock for Arcanum 2.. That design doc was an amalgam of several designers wanting to make a sequel for Arcanum 2..

And there I mentioned that there was an ore That was supposed to be the goal of, or came to. The original goal was find Franklin Payne. But then it turns out: hey, there's this Crazy Ore underground that you can use to. Combine magic and Tech into one item. I never liked that. I argued against it. Back then I said this tension between Magic and Tech is the whole point. It's the whole Crux of Arcanum. We talked about how it's like a Lord of the Rings, 14th century, vaguely fantasy campaign that has been thrust into an industrial age. And the fact that magic and Tech do not combine is what makes it interesting. You have elves that are like very anti-tech and you have dwarves. They're like we love Tech but we're going to keep it to ourselves and they have humans who want to spread both everywhere. It was an interesting tension and I thought that or undermined it. But what worse — and I didn't have the terminology then — was introducing that ore is a form of creepy normality.

Once that organs introduced — now you can have a gun. That can be magic, or maybe the bullets can be magical. Shot from the gun you can have spells that, uh, maybe duplicate technology or work with technology. You can make technological enhancers, you can put on your hands that make your spouse do more to me, I was like we're gonna, we're gonna change the nature of what made Arcanum special and unique. So that was a huge concern of mine.

Bloodlines had something similar, when I came on board two years after it had started, I was — it was on the Tailwind of wanting to put Kane, the original vampire in addition to this game, into the game and because Kane was supposedly like super powerful and always there working in the background at one point it we were going to make it obvious that Kane was involved in the events of Bloodlines. We pulled back from that, thankfully, because I think that not. Only makes the player agency seem less involved but putting Kane in there as one of the most historical and most powerful figures kind of shifts.

Now what can be in you know a vampire computer game? Vampire masquerade computer game? Are you gonna start putting some of the Elder you know vampires in?

Um? Are you gonna put in the?

Uh, what are they called? The Nephilim or whatever the old, really old things are? It basically starts pushing the nature of the game away from. Here's a player character, Vampire who's just trying to figure his way among the Clans. It makes the issues too big and too broad and changes the nature of what the game is.

Interestingly. I wish I had known about creeping normality because when I was at WildStar I could never get a read on what people wanted to do. When I was a programming director it seemed like anything. Anything went, when I took over as design director, part of the problem was every time I tried to Define limits they would get pushed back by people at my peer level or higher. So it was hard to control the game. It's hard to give it a good theme, a good feel, a good. You as the player should within a few hours of playing a game, go: okay, I get this game. I know what is and isn't part of this game.

I mean it would be really weird if you were playing Skyrim in a flying saucer landed. It would be weird. You know deploy playing, you know a Deus Ex, and suddenly people start casting magic.

It's good to have limits. It's good to have to find limits in games. In fact, that gets me into what, why I wanted to talk about Creepy normality. What does this mean for game design? And especially if you're making a game, I very, very much encourage you to set hard limits. You can even write them down. Remember when I said you can Define your goals for the game. That's a good place to write down what your limits are and say: this is what is in this game and this is not what's in this game. If you, have to do that, because if you don't, two things can happen: you can overscope the game, which, as I've talked about in other videos, overscoping leads to too many features, too much content and creepy normality, which is anything anyone thinks of belongs in the game. But also Without Limits, you end up with when I talked about perfect is the enemy of good. Without Limits, you can end up with people really wanting to make something fantastic in the game which doesn't even really belong, because they're pushing a limit. It takes a lot of work to get that thing working in the game and feeling like it belongs, so it takes a lot of extra work and the work you spend trying to smash that feature in that's slightly beyond what your limits are, or time you could have been spent making the game better. So I see creepy normality as a dangerous thing in computer game design and something you need to keep an eye on. And I think if there's ever time for a game director to be heavy-handed, I think it's with the limits that have been set for the game. Define them early, get everybody to agree to them, and then your job is to place that and make sure everything stays in that limit. It's okay for someone to push up against it, but say no to anything that goes past it and I think that will help you — help you make a better game. So I hope you all Now understand and appreciate creeping normality.
