+++
title = "Design Pillars"
date = "2023-07-17"
id = "N7b7LFXBZ9M"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design", "Game Director"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about design pillars."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about design pillars.

This is something that I've mentioned several times in several past videos. I've seen a lot of comments from people asking me to explain them, kind of like what, are they, how are they used, how do you write them? So I thought I'd describe what they are and then, because they've changed over the years, I'm Gonna Give You examples of what fallouts were and then what arcanums were and finally what The Outer Worlds design pillars were, and you can kind of see for yourself, um, how they changed over the years and how they were used. So first of all, let me Define design pillars. They are the high level guidelines for making the whole game, every aspect, the Story, the system, mechanics, the — you know — ads, um, if you look at the pillars, you have a good idea of what kind of game is being made. Not just you know what the setting is and um, you know what the — the basic genre of the game is, but you have a good idea of what the intention is of this game — the - the pillars are the foundation upon which the entire game rests and because of that you have to make these early. These are foundational, if you're making a game and two years in you decide to change design pillars, you've just changed the game and you have possibly invalidated all the work you just did in the last two years. So design pillars tend to be made as early as possible in the design process.

I told you it goes setting story mechanics. Certainly before you're done with mechanics, you should have your design pillars, preferably before you even done with the setting. Also, the entire team should accept and understand these pillars. They should have read them and they should agree with them, and not just the.

Designers, the, artists and the, writers and the programmers — everybody working on this game — should know what these pillars are, understand what they mean and accept that's the game they're making. You know early on, um, when I made games, either by myself or there's maybe me in a uh, another artist or maybe one other programmer, you didn't really need pillars. I think it's still wise for small teams to make them, just so you can. It's very clear what game you're trying to make and you can also share these with people say: what, are you making? You can say: here are the pillars. Um, it's great to — if you ever publish or you're talking with uh journalists or whatever, it's great to share those pillars. But when teams were tiny, everybody just kind of got it as teams got bigger, especially when you had people working on Specialized things or people that weren't going to talk to everyone on the team every day, you kind of needed explicit pillars, just so everybody agreed, everybody's on the same page.

Interestingly enough, um, I don't even think when we first made them we didn't even call them pillars. I believe fallouts was called The Vision doc, but then inside it listed what essentially were the pillars. Also, the Fallout one was huge, it was multiple pages long, the Arcanum one was a couple pages and I don't even think The Outer Worlds one failed an entire Confluence page like a screen on Confluence.

Um, because, as I said, design docs have not become, are not static either, and as we went along, I mean they went from Individual word docs to, uh, networked word docs that had tracking changes turned on to now we do everything in. Confluence pages that are interlinked together, so let me start with fallouts, pillars, and I will go over those now. Remember these weren't called pillars, these are part of the vision document. Brian Fargo asked me to write the Fallout Vision document late November, early December of 95. Because by that time I had a team, a very pretty big team, and I think it was at least 20 people big by interplay standards, and he said: I want to know what the vision is for the game.

And I wrote one and he hated it and I was like: and I tried again. I mean I tried really hard on the second one and he hated it I was frustrated by then because I was like I don't know what he wants.

I'm writing down what I think the vision is. And Chris Taylor knew I was frustrated.

We'd come back from Christmas break. This is early January.

He could tell I was frustrated. He goes, let me give a crack at it and I said, please, you know, just give me something I can give him that we, that we like and he likes. Chris wrote something up. We loved it, now it's too long for me to read the whole thing. It's a really long document and it's funny and it's got some dark humor in it too.

But I will go over just so. You know.

Fallouts um vision statement listed 14 design pillars and if you've played Fallout, you can tell me how close we came to achieving all of these pillars. I can tell you some of them, maybe not so close, but I will go through them in order.

Pillar one: Mega levels of violence. We threw it up there right at the beginning. We wanted our game to be violent.

Now, keep in mind: we said this explicitly in 96 and everybody knew that's what we were making. So if later on anyone expressed surprise at how violent Fallout was, I wasn't having it.

The second pillar was that there is often no right solution, and it's interesting that he said this before the next pillar, which is there will always be multiple Solutions, because I used to always say, hey, there's got to be multiple solutions to everything, except for side quests, which I've talked about. But Chris also wanted to emphasize that sometimes there's no right solution, that there's only different ways of doing it that are Shades of Gray, you know you can do it this way, but then these people are unhappy. You can do it this way and this purple.

These people aren't happy. You can do this third way and everybody's unhappy, but there is no like correct way of doing it that really really resonated with the Fallout team. Fourth pillar was that players, actions, affect the world and the world will react to the player. I think we did a really good job at that. The end slides are informed by that. We really didn't want the player to be able to leave the game without knowing: hey, you, caused a lot of stuff, you caused some collateral damage on your rampaging around Southern California after a nuclear war. The fifth one was that there should always be a sense of urgency. We wanted the player to feel like: you know, I gotta do that, I gotta save my ball.

Oh no, I gotta take care of these mutants. Oh no, I gotta get rid of the master. This is what. This is the pillar that everybody who wanted the timer um in the game, the one that if you didn't get the water chip in 150. Days the game would end — they would appeal to pillar number five and say, hey, we have to have a sense of urgency.

Personally, I thought that was too much, but you know we, obviously shipped with it and then we patched it. Uh, the six pillars: we wanted the game to be open-ended, meaning that was a combination of: we wanted to be able to go wherever you wanted. Uh, we want to be able to do what you wanted. The game just had to be able to handle that and no matter how you played, the game would come up with an ending for it. Um, it would have.

You know, that's why we had end slides for you being dipped in the bat and joining the mutant Army and made end slides few, cutting off all the mutants. The seventh pillar was: we always wanted the player to have a goal. Basically, we never wanted the player to not know what he should be doing and that's why they're really only three main goals in Fallout: get the water chip, destroy the mutant Army, destroyed the master.

You always know you have to be doing that. There may be quests that you're on, there may be side quests you're on, but you always know, overarching, what you're supposed to be doing. The eighth pillar was: the player has control over his own actions. We never wanted to take agency away from the player. We never wanted to tell the player: okay, right now you have to be good, you have to be bad, you have to kill this person. You know directly, I mean some of our Solutions about blowing up where the person happened to be.

There was a lot of stuff where we often rejected quests because we're like I don't want to make. The player do that or I don't want the. When you just describe your quest idea, step three is: and then the player does this.

We just didn't like that the ninth one was interface. This is the one I'm like we really felt strongly that we had to make a really good interface. We were concerned at the time with games coming out with really complicated interfaces. We knew our game was complicated. We tried to make it as simple as possible. We could have done a better job, but we had that as a pillar. We tried.

The tenth pillar were the encounter windows. We loved the playheads so much that we made those — encounter Windows is what we call them. We made that a pillar of the game. We wanted to have as many of those as we could. We thought they were cool. We thought they sold the game. We thought they gave the game a picker kind of vibe. Um, the 11th pillar was we wanted to put in this wide variety of weapons and armor and actions the player could take with them as we could, we, um. This led to the 12th one, which was we also wanted very detailed character creation rules. We wanted the player to be able to make, if they could think of it, they could kind of make a character like that — and this is back when we're doing Gertz, which meant we were using, I think we had over a hundred — I want to say we had over 200 of the skills, but I don't remember. But it was a lot, and because of that's why we made pre-made characters, because this pillar said the detailed character creation rules, but also pre-made characters. We knew that casual players or people playing the game. For the first time are not going to be able to absorb all this or know what was important. So he said: have some pre-made characters.

The 13th pillar, was interesting. Now, keep in mind we were still making groups. It was: we're going to make this game for the public, but we want people who play gerps to be happy. So, in other words, we wanted to be faithful to gerps, but we wanted people who didn't know groups that still think it's a fun game. And that informed a lot of our decisions when we were making choices about what to do, about Gert skills.

And then, finally, it just said his 14th pillar was: the team is very motivated. This was something we recognized and we kept as a pillar because we thought it was important. It wasn't until years later that I realized: wow, I've never since then put that. As a pillar, I've taken it for granted.

Doesn't the team want to make this game? They're on, if not, why didn't they be put on another team and make that game? And, like I said once when I tried to switch projects with another programmer and the executive producer said, no, I'm like, why do you want people making games they don't want to make? But Chris Taylor put that in there as a pillar, that the team is motivated.

Not, they should be, not, they're going to be that they were. He said everybody was excited making this game. And he was right. Okay, that was a very long-winded Vision, doc.

Slash pillars for Fallout, now let me tell you what arcanums were. Arcanums was only a couple pages, there were five of them.

The first one was Tech. That matters, and the example we gave was we used Dynamic colored lighting. This is something we're excited about, that we had Dynamic shadows in our, Canon demo. It was really cool.

Um daytime our Sunrise was tinted, more bluish than Sunset, which was more reddish. The lighting affected skill use, as I explained in another video. So we were saying right there in The Proposal that when we put Tech in for things, we were using technology so that we could have a more realistic, complex character um system mechanics going into that. We actually named character creation as one of our pillars. We wanted a rich class, free character creation system. More, even more so in Fallout we were like, if you could think about it, we wanted to be able to make it within the context of arcanum's world, so you couldn't make like Superman or Spider-Man, but you want to be a old Chrome witch, boom, you want to be, uh, old west Gunslinger — boom, you could make a character that was very much like that.

The third pillar supported that. It was a complex, stat-driven game system. Yes, we actually emphasized in the pillars for Arcanum how complex it was. We thought this was a selling point. Now I know a lot of you out there going. I know that's why I liked it I know, bear in mind it's one of the reasons Arcanum didn't sell.

Well, yes, it was buggy. Yes, it had, there were some other issues. Yes, it got over, shadowed by a lot of other games coming out. Yes, it was isometric. In the time everyone was going 3D. But one of the things that affected the sales — trust me, or go back and look at reviews, and also I got sales data from Sierra — was the fact it was very complicated. Basically all the Casual RPGs bounced right off of arcane. That stuck with me for a long time. Um, you can not believe me but you really can't deny it unless you have some sales numbers and some demographics figures. That I didn't get.

Um, the fourth pillar of Arcanum was a huge single player quest line, actually quest lines. We wanted a ton of quests. We wanted the main quest to be really long. In fact, relative to fallout, Fallout had three um main story quests: uh, get the water chip, destroy the mutant Army and the Vats and destroy the master. We had 27.

Main story points along the Arcanum main story quest line. That's not even counting all the different ways you could do them with all the different characters you build and the tons of side quests. We had side quests everywhere. We had Side Quests for every master: training of every skill. We were insane back then, and then, finally, on top of all of that, we added the multiplayer pillar. Now, yes, that was requested by Sierra, but because they requested it and we committed to it, we made it a pillar. We wanted you to be able to play this game with your friends. We wanted you to be able to make modules. So that's the reason we threw in the. The tools was effectively to support this pillar. We wanted you to be able to make modules of you know settings and stories you could play with your friends.

Now, how close we achieved all of these on Arcanum, I don't know. That's you. I'll leave that as an exercise for the reader.

Finally, let me tell you what The Outer Worlds pillars were, and we only had three. Well, we really had a fourth one, but we were. There were three main. Ones and then the fourth one that we just said was a given. So the four pillars, or the three pillars plus one, were the first.

One is simple but deep. We basically wanted to make the game as simple as possible. The game systems, the stories, the way companions worked, requests worked, and I know this has come up because people think we oversimplified. But after Arcanum and in many games after that, I was always worried that I seemed to be pushing away the Casual RPG player and I said there's got to be a way to make something simple but not simplistic. So the idea was we would make simple systems that gained depth and complexity if you chose to explore them, and I've explained this before.

Like our melee skill was very easy. You pick up a weapon. Your melee skill determines if you hit people that are within range. Um, actually no, it you automatically hit people within range — um, the manly skeletal term — how much damage you did. It was the range skill to determine if you hit.

So that's simple. Pick up this item, if it looks like you're hitting somebody, you're hitting them. How much damage you're doing proportional to your skill and the weapon you're using, that's it. Now, if people wanted to learn more, they could start digging into melee and they put points in the melee and then, um, they would, uh, where they put points in the combat, and then it would specialize into melee and then they'd have unlocks and then they could do things like a really cool, like Power Attack stuff. You, that were Maneuvers that you could choose to do with melee. You could ignore all that if you wanted, but it was there for the, non-casual player, to start exploring and then your perks that go with it and you know, here are things that are this, particular weapon. Maybe I'm gonna specialize in science melee weapons. There's one up my science skill and my melee skill and I'm gonna buy some perks that are good for that.

Second pillar was dark but humorous. This was basically Leonard and I saying we've always done this in our games: he's dark, I'm funny together. We're dark but humorous. Um, we saw it as part of our special sauce. We decided to codify that into a pillar, the same way that Chris Taylor said the team is motivated was a pillar of Fallout. I wanted to codify that into our game that we could point to it, remind everybody who read these.

There's only four of them to read. That was something we're trying to do. Our setting maybe a struggling, nearly pre-apocalyptic Colony World, which is just years away from sliding into barbarism. But you wouldn't know it from playing the game.

At first it seems silly, well, I shouldn't say silly. Letter doesn't like silly. It was Darkly humorous, and what I liked was the most humorous, and even the silly parts of the game were actually the darkest parts of the game or they contrasted to. You know, like you've always heard, you can't have Darkness without light and vice versa. That's what I like about humor and dark storylines.

Our third pillar was interesting because it was the one that got used the most by me when people suggested new features or new content. It was fun Trump's realism, but be consistent. Basically, I told people we're making a game, we're not making a simulation, so we're always gonna err on the side of fun over the side of realism. And that came. Up over and over and over.

People wanted things that were more — I guess now they call them in Sims and I was like, no, but that's realistic, yes, but it's not fun. You know, I like that the player can jump really high on. I like that. The fact that you know they, these phobias, are something that you gain on a you know, a flip, a switch is flipped and Bam, now you're, you've got a phobia. I think it's funny.

The only thing was we added that be consistent, because we want, once you established a limit, you had to be consistent with that. So once you said: you know, Falls past this distance are fatal. I didn't want somebody to put in a really short small pit and then put a something at the bottom saying, well, now you're dead. You know if people look and go, yeah, I've fallen. Out much before I can follow that I can fall that much now, and then they jump off and it just said, nope, you died. I didn't want that, so for all of our roles we said they can be funny and unrealistic, but once it establishes — you know what's what, how things work. You have to stay with that, and then the fourth one, which we threw in is just a given because there's no way we weren't going to do this was The Outer Worlds is a classic obsidian game and everything that meant it meant Strong World setting, good narrative, tons of player customization, a variety of companions, player choices that have meaningful consequences, multiple endings — these are things that happen in. You know, all of the classic obsidian role-playing games.

We were going to support it. In ours we originally only had three pillars, but people were like: well, shouldn't we be doing these other things? And I'm like, well, those are given. So I decided I'd throw them all in as one pillar called classic obsidian role-playing game, and because of that, that was the four they were. You know, they were very simple to tell people.

Simple but deep, dark but humorous, fun Trump's realism, but be consistent and a classic obsidian game. Very easy to understand, very easy to explain to people and then, when they ask questions, you could dive into setting and storyline and all those things. So every time I talk about design pillars in my talks, I'm talking about something like what I just told you: what started with Fallout tightened up an Arcanum and then really we honed for the The Outer Worlds. That's what I'm talking about when I say you should have design pillars.
