+++
title = "Arcanum Optimization"
date = "2024-11-27"
id = "nJdyR0nO17E"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Programming"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Arcanum optimization."
references = ["QWAetn0Ch9I", "IhaHPgZS1Fw", "hZEosFcqmcU", "Iw3bCdIvAj0"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Arcanum optimization.

This comes from a set of questions from uh, a viewer, diiz, who asks a few topic suggestions for upcoming videos: how to optimize game code, how to even find what is wise to optimize, and different ways to measure results of optimization, and a bunch more questions too that didn't have to do with optimization. So so I'm going to stop it right there. I may get the other ones later, but let me just talk about optimization, and I've decided to go back to Arcanum because I can talk about that code, I own that code, I can look at that code, I looked at that code and um it. Lets me just be much more specific about what I'm going to talk about now. I already have a general optimization video, which I'll link below, which talks about basic techniques for code optimization, like when to do them, uh, when sometimes changing the design specification can lead to faster code or code that uses less memory. So sometimes the optimization is not in code, it's change your design, even just a little bit, and you can end up with way better code. I also have a video on the specific memory savings that we got in Arcanum through object compaction. I will summarize it again here, but I recommend watching that video too.

Uh, it's called prototype and structures. It's linked below, now this video is going to be about specific optimizations that we used in Arcanum. Arcanum was way bigger than Fallout, uh, and we did it with four programmers. It was set in an open world, which was huge. So we were trying to deal with not only how to store all of that but how to do calculations over things like creatures, because there could be tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of creatures if we tried to load every creature that was. In the instance you were in because when you were out in the terrain in the open map we couldn't possibly load every sector, so we had to load things in and out as needed, and that's where the optimization came in. So let me talk about memory optimization and time optimization differently, and I start with memory.

Let me summarize what we did in Arcanum. In Arcanum we did something called object compaction, where an object only stored how it differed from the Prototype it was based on. For many things, that prototype stored almost everything. So if you had an item like a dagger or an object like, you know, a zombie, almost everything you need to know about that creature is stored in its prototype: how many hit points it has, total, how it does attacks. Um, what art to use all that stored in the Prototype? Typically the only thing that changed between the object and the Prototype was where it was located in the world — which might be in the world or in your inventory — and it's current hit points. The maximum hit points were whatever was in the Prototype, unless, of course, the designer wanted to drop it down and say: these are really tough zombies.

I'm going to give them 50% more hit points, which you could do also. Items would store their current number of charges. Creatures would store ability use, like if there was an ability that they could only use. You know once every 30 seconds that then the timer would, of course, be part of the object. What we did — and a lot of this was done by, uh, Mark Harrison, who's one of the programmers — he used bit fields to indicate in an object What fields were present in that object and if they weren't present, then it.

Meant go to the prototype to get it. So let's say you wanted to look up, you know hit points and that was the fourth field that would have been on the object if we were storing all of it. So you look and you count in four bits, so you skip over the first three bits, you get to the fourth one and if it's a one, that means you grab it from here from the object. If it's a zero, that means go grab it from the Prototype. Now, if the first three Fields were zero, that meant the first field in the object was hit points. If one of those first three, if any of those first, weren't zero, it meant you had to skip over a certain number of fields to get to the hit points.

And Mark made a whole thing — I think it was called Big bits — that stored an array so you could have bits as long as you wanted. You weren't restricted to 32 and we either knew how big they were going to be or that was stored somewhere so you knew how many bites to skip over if, Fields existed in the object but you were looking for a field later on. Here's what I want to point out: all of that stuff, the, big bits and the that you have to store, that was extra memory, that was in each object, but even with that bitfield overhead, we saved so much memory because there were tons of objects in the world that were used, a ton — but almost never differed from the Prototype: walls, props like trees and rocks, those almost always just varied from the prototype by their location. That It's here, The Rock, here, where the Prototype may not even specify location, everything else about it.

The art it used, its maximum hit points, everything were never varied. The this was true for items and monsters as well. So all the swords in the game. There was just one sword prototype and it stored everything you need to know about a sword: what animations to use, what it looked like in inventory, how much damage it did. All of that.

The only that varied — usually if someone had sword was where it was located and if it had been damaged at all. Now, if you wanted to make a plus one sword, you had two options. You could say: here's the sword prototype and here's the plus one sword, which varies because it's two hit field. It has a plus one in it instead of a zero. Maybe the damage also has plus one. That's one way to do it, or you could make a prototype if you think you're going to have a lot of plus one swords, you can make a plus one sword prototype and then they could all refer to that. It was basically a trade-off on how often If an item was going to be used a lot, make a prototype. Otherwise, just store the Delta from the base prototype and you're done.

Monsters were the same way, if the monster used most of the same art, almost all the same abilities and all that, just different Delta, it from the Prototype. You can see a lot more detail in the Arcanum prototype and structure video that's linked. We also had TIG, which I talk about in a video about TIG. TIG managed memory for Arcanum the way it, the way Tig did. That is when you initialized TIG, which was a static library that Linked In to Arcanum. We also used it in Temple when TIG would start it. Would allocate one gig, gigantic block of memory, and the reason for this is it then managed everything within that block to reduce fragmentation. I'll talk about how it did that one hu.

Another big advantage of having TIG manage all the memory is in C in many C compilers. If you called malok saying give me a block of memory, if you did it in thebug mode, it would set all of those to zero in. It would set all the memory in that block to zero.

But on release it didn't do that, which led to some weird issues between the two. So we in TIG we had malok and kok. Malok was give me allocate memory. Cak was allocate the memory but clear it off to zero. So if you, if you needed it to be cleared out, you called cak, but a lot of times you didn't need it. You weren't going to look in it and you could just it could be random garbage stuff, it just meant you could be, since the programmer knew what they were doing.

It led to faster memory allocation, when you got a pointer back to a me, a block, in that giant block of memory, you didn't get a pointer, you got a handle and when you wanted to use it you had to lock the handle. And when you locked the handle, it returned an actual pointer to where the block was. And then, when you were done, you unlocked it and the block was now free to be moved around. And that's what we did: unlocked blocks inside that giant block of memory could be moved around. And the reason you do that is, after you do a lot of memory allocation and freeing, you might allocate a block, allocate another block. Allocate a third block and then free the second block. So now you've got a hole in the in between these two blocks and if you try to allocate a big, a block bigger than that one, you can't use that one because these two blocks are here. Well, the nice thing is about the handles is if t two blocks weren't locked, we could just slide the third one down and touch the first one, and now you have all the space over here free. As long as we know no one's accessing that memory, it's free for us to move anywhere you want. And then when you call um lock on the handle you've got. You get a new pointer, but because it you don't care what the pointer was, because it was locked before.

You're fine. That did wonders for handling in real time memory fragmentation. We also put guard bites at the beginning and end of every block. So if you asked for 1,000 bytes, we really give you like 1,8 and the four guard bites at the front and four guard bites at the end. We did that because whenever a handle was locked or freed we could peek at those guard bites and see if they had changed from whatever pattern we wrote into those guard bites when we allocated the memory. If that pattern had changed, that meant somebody stomped memory. That helped us find a ton of memory issues. So those are the two main ways we handled memory in Arcanum.

Now let me talk about how we did time. We used a third-party program — I think it was from Intel, called vune. I Googled and it still exists, and this one is from Intel. But the one I'm describing is how we used it 25 years ago. The one now is way more. Powerful. It handles paralyzation. It handles threading, um, you can measure how good your multiple threads are running. We mainly use it to determine how much time was spent in each function. In C these were C, so it's functions.

The time would be turned in a hierarchical map. So let's say you had function a and inside function a it called B and C. So you might get returned that you spent 100 milliseconds in function a. But then if you look you can see, well, I also spent 50 milliseconds in B and 30 in C. You could, then that meant you only spent 20 in a. That meant if you really wanted to get bang out of your buck for optimization, you really wanted to optimize function B, because that's you were spending most of your time. But you had to look at a because if B did very little work but was in a loop being called an a, then you're. You wanted to concentrate on optimizing that Loop. Maybe you could unroll it, maybe you could get rid, maybe you don't have to Loop over everything you're looping in. Maybe you could store it differently, so as you're looping you can tell: okay, I've got to something that's too far away or something that the timer is that isn't ready to be processed, so I don't have to process everything in that Loop. Or if it's just being called once.

You know you got to optimize inside function B. But the important thing is you're optimizing to get that 50 milliseconds down. If you can cut it in half, you just saved 25 milliseconds, which is one quarter of the time spent. But if you spend your time optimizing function a, even if you cut that in half, you only go from 20 to 10. So you only save 10%, so vune really helped us zoom in on where we needed to optimize our code for time. Another thing we did is we didn't let functions have a lot of time.

I talked about in Arcanum scripts. We would only give it a certain amount of time and if it exceeded it we would throw an error message and say this script spent too much time. It's how we caught a lot of infinite Loops, um, or also just scripts that we're trying to do too much. And then whoever wrote the script would have to shorten it, for AI creatures would get heartbeat to decide what they wanted to do, and that heartbeat was proportional to their distance. So things that were close to the player got faster heart rate beats and things that were farther away got slower heartbeats until finally, past a certain point, they got no heartbeat at.

All. The reason we did this is it let you creatures that were near the player would react faster, and we scene is always moving where if they were off screen, it was okay. If they decided to move from here to here and maybe just teleport. You can't see them, so it didn't matter that they're only getting a heartbeat every 2 seconds, 4 seconds, 10 seconds. If they're really far away, you weren't seeing what they were doing anyway.

That worked really well. We also reduced Time by only calculating things when we needed them. So let's say you needed the distance of things I don't know to use for that heartbeat calculation. You might calculate the distance between, say, the player and a monster and then store it in there and put a dirty bit on it. If either the monster or the player moves, you mark that calculation as dirty, which means the next time someone goes to get that distance they know it's dirty and they have to recalculate it. The nice thing about this is that that at the cost of that one little bit, that many times, you could store in the, in the data itself. If you knew you didn't need the full range of values that that field could store, you could just put a dirty bit at the top.

The nice thing about this is, during a heartbeat of a creature, it might check several times its distance to the player, but it never had to recalculate it because nothing could move inside that heart rate, that heartbeat. Similarly, in between things that were really close to the player, that were getting fast heartbeats, neither of them may have moved. You know, if they're getting heartbeats every 10 milliseconds, nothing may have moved.

So it just saved on a lot of that. Calculation. You can do the same thing in unity in updates if you want to store something and Market is dirty. That way the update can say: if it's not dirty, I won't recalculate it.

Similarly, you can reduce Time by reducing the number of times you Loop over things. I talked about this before. You can also do it for Collision. You don't want Collision for Collision. You don't want to check every object against every other object in the world. You can use something smart like a quad tree to partition the world space and then only check things that are near You by saying: well, you have to be a leaf of the same parent and quality quad tree. You can look up quad tree if you want to know what I'm talking about.

And that way you're not checking my Collision against everything in the world, you're only collect, checking my Collision. Against things that are near Mii in the quad tree. Now, yes, you have to maintain the quad tree, but again it's you update the things in the quad tree Once, then lots of things can do really fast comparisons. But keep in mind that this is a Time memory tradeoff. You're storing a quad tree memory so you don't have to do as many calculations time. You need to be really careful whenever you're doing optimizations, because usually time optimizations often increase memory use and vice versa. And what I'm talking about too is true in C and maybe not C+ or C, because you don't, you tend not to handle memory. When you create a new object in C++ or in C, you may not be capable of intercepting the memory allocation and redirecting it to your own allocator. And if you can't, that means you can't control the memory defragment — defragmentation - you can. Still try to reduce how many, how much memory you use, but it's actual control is outside of your. It's, allocation may be outside of your control. Also, if you use a library or game engine, they're going to be doing a lot of things outside of your control that you can't. You can't do anything with.

Unity doesn't let you see code for their engine — unreal does I've talked about. If you go to, if you modify in real engine code, though, now you have your own modifications and when new updates come out, you either have to fold your modifications in or not and just go with the new version. There are ways around this, for example, I, in several games I worked on, I got around unity's update by not having an update in an object that I created and instead I had it managed by a manager class, the manager. Class got an update and then decided which of its children needed an update and when. That way, I wasn't slaved to unity's update. When Unity felt like I got an update, I updated my objects when I wanted to update them.

So there's ways around this, but if you're using third party libraries and game engines, there are ways around it, but you are limited in what you can do. That's one reason I like making my own game engine anyway. I hope this was a good insight into how to do time and space optimizations and I hope thequiz that this answered your question, or at least your first three questions.
