+++
title = "A Chat With Leonard Boyarsky, Part 2"
date = "2023-06-04"
id = "Njwv5tbmhzg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Interviews and Chats", "Fallout", "Arcanum"]
summary = "Him and I'm joined again today for part two of my chat with Leonard bararski. Hey Leonard, hey Tim, how's it going? I'm good."
references = []
+++

Him and I'm joined again today for part two of my chat with Leonard bararski. Hey Leonard, hey Tim, how's it going? I'm good.

Before we get started, I saw that you, uh, showed your gnod trophy. I wanted to show my Award of Excellence that interplay gave me. Um, the funny thing about this is I think Jason got one too. There was a party — there's a party — where all of interplay was at this party and they gave out that award. I don't know if this is what happened. I think this is what happened with Gana too. You don't remember what I'm gonna say, do you? So the next day, Rob comes in and he gives it to me. I'm like what is this?

He's like it's your reward, because we weren't at the party, we were all working everywhere. I do remember Eric. Eric DeMille brought me mine and he goes: hey, father, again, all here's your award. And I'm like what? He goes: yeah, you guys were working, of course, so here's your reward.

Yeah, weren't we talking about self-exploding last time on the channel? Well, that came with a bonus, right? Hey, Nuss, it came with a donut maybe.

Um, I was, it actually meant something to me. I was, it was nice that they, uh recognized that we were doing, you know, stuff that that uh, they thought was good at the time. I mean, I liked it, was cool, it was, um, yeah, especially because I mentioned this yesterday in my video after I was specifically told by the executive producer that no one would ever use Canal because software was not shared, but and then everybody started using it was kind of nice to get an award, yeah, but uh, I know we were going to jump. We finished kind of talking about Fallout, we were going to jump into Fallout 2, but we wanted to talk about something before. Oh, yeah, so we did this. We did this charity, talk a little while ago and we were talking about Wasteland and how Brian was trying to get Wasteland too for us and I said something like you know, Wasteland 2 didn't influence at all us at all and, uh, that was I didn't mean it in the way people took it. So I kind of wanted to clarify that, because Wasteland 2 was a huge influence on us. In the Box we said spiritual successor to Wasteland and we, completely meant it not Wasteland two, Wasteland um, because they had the choices.

It was dark, it was, you know they had that. They, you know they were. Weren't they the ones who exploded?

People like blood sausages, yes, um. You know, he showed rather than yeah. So we took all that from Wasteland um and ran with it.

What I was talking? About was we started talking about doing the possibility of changing Fallout into Wasteland too, and we didn't change anything in the game. We just kept making the game we were making. We didn't start changing the story or anything. So that's what I meant. Is it like, even if we had gotten Wasteland too, we would have kind of had to figure out a way to merge the two things? Because we weren't, we didn't set out to necessarily make a sequel to Wasteland in terms of the setting or story?

Well, we used to talk about that Quest at the beginning where the little boy lost their dog, yeah, and when you found the dog was rabbit and you had to shoot it and then you had to lie to the kid, I mean, or not that was. We used to talk about things like that because that was something we wanted. That. Was our springboard. We wanted to do that, but a lot more exactly.

So let's talk about Fallout 2, because you and Jason actually wrote, so the team that was assigned to it did a story, and then Brian wanted me to write a story, but you and Jason had already written a story. Yeah, you want to talk about your story?

Yeah, the timeline on all this stuff is really bizarre, because — because - because you know, I got married during this time and I could have sworn — some of this stuff happened while I was off on my, honeymoon, but, like I, that was August of 1997 and we had to be done by September, and I I know we didn't do all the stuff that we needed to do to finish the game in that short a period of time, though we did put in a lot of we put in. A lot of hours in that time. Um, so who knows when this happened — and I still don't know why it happened, but it's — or how it happened — at a certain point we realized that there was a lot of writing that hadn't been done for the game. Um, we had plans for everything we were gonna do, and then we were finding big areas that were empty. I remember — maybe it wasn't my honeymoon, but I went on vacation.

Right for on vacation, Jason had opened up the Brotherhood of Steel and he goes: like there's nothing in here, there's nothing. There was like two Talking Heads and nothing else, and one of the Talking Heads didn't even talk about what he was supposed to be talking about, because we did those so early. Um, I think we're just kind of taking a shot in the dark for what was going to be.

In some of them, and so he rewrote that at and he had this thing where he had to go in. I don't remember which one it was. There was two different heads.

One of them he basically did almost like a Mad Libs, where he cut, it into pieces, like all the lines he had that were already vo recorded, and rearranged the whole thing um to make it make sense or kind of tell more of the story we wanted to tell. Um, so great, we found that, oh sweet, we found that I'd go off on vacation.

Um, I promised my fiance at the time, or wife, whatever it was, um, you know I'm not going to talk to work. So like we were gone for a week and a half, two weeks.

Uh, at the very end she's like: okay, you can call work. I called work and Jason Goes.

Hey, remember Brotherhood of Steel? Yeah, he's like the whole game is like that and I'm like what? So I don't know how did we get to that point — is like what I've never been able to figure out: the um.

Well, I talked about this in another video where Fallout wasn't as hierarchical as a lot of the other games that were there. Sure, we had our, we had leads and roles like that, but we kind of let people own the sections they were working on. And if someone told me, yeah, I've got that, I just believed them. There was no trust but verify, it was like my own stuff to do. No, I remember all that. Yeah, if you told me you did it, I believe you did it. But I believe the most shocking thing was: it the bone yards?

Was it called additive or were those? Anyway, I remember. Opening up a folder and it was.

There was literally nothing inside it. Yeah, no Maps, no dialogues, no quests, nothing. And that was less than two months before. When did like? Because, QA was playing it this whole time.

That's what I meant. I mean, I understand why we didn't. We were so busy doing the stuff we had to do. They did the main store requests.

Uh, they confirmed: how did you get through it all? Um, and back then we thought it was going to take at least 20 hours, remember. So that's why, when I saw that eight minute speed run a few years later, I was like, oh my God, I didn't think that was possible. But they and — and also I mean they would play a lot, they would do side quests. There were people coming in at night on the weekend because they wanted to play before the.

Next drop on Monday, but that's the hard thing for QA: if something isn't there, they don't know it's supposed to be there. So the fact that you couldn't go to the boneyards didn't raise any alarms, I guess. Yeah, so there were a lot of places that were mentioned, like when you first showed up at Shady Sands, I think airdesh mentions a gang called the Vipers that never made it in. Yeah, that's true, but he talks about them like they're a big thing, like if you were playing this game for the first time, think I'm gonna run into vipers.

No, you're not. Oh yeah, so so, yeah, so we started. Um, I looked at some of the writing that was there. I looked at a lot of the writing that wasn't there, but even the writing that was there, I'm like there's a lot of this that I could do. Better. I didn't think I was. I didn't think of myself as a writer. I'd done creative writing in high school, but I was all about just being an artist, um. But I've read a lot and I'm like I could, I could fake it better than some of the stuff that we had written in there. Um, whether it was true or not, or I was just being arrogant, but I jumped in there and started writing: um, Jason did too. We, rewrote a lot of stuff. We, uh, like I did the master.

Um, I didn't quite do the rework that Jason had to do in the Brotherhood of Steel. I did rewrite all the player lines. I made sure that the padding made sense, like when you were talking him into killing himself, all that stuff. I had to kind of kind of massage that a little bit.

Um, but we just so we wrote all that stuff. And then I think that they were already writing the story for Fallout 2 and me and Jason were like we could, you know, let's, try to see what we could come up with. Because we came up with the story for Fallout as a group. It wasn't like me and Jason spearheaded or you spearheaded, and it was kind of like this community thing, um, so we'd never have done that before. So we came up with the story and I don't remember a lot of it.

Like you talked about the war machine that was in there. I know there was a Brotherhood of Steel guy who got kicked out, who he ran into, which is that that painting I did for the Fallout 2 comic book. That was a load screen, um, that was where the players being attacked by lobotomites. Which I was so happy, by the way, that they used those in New Vegas, um, because we never got to put them in the game — um, so, but the. So the other thing that I remember is that the war machines and the and the Brotherhood of Steel Were Somehow in League with the overseer. I don't remember anything else about it I remember we liked it at the time, um, I know Jason really liked it I thought it was pretty good. I liked it too, but if you remember what happened, was we? You guys wrote it on your own, yeah, and then later Brian said: Fergus, I don't like this story that's being made for Fallout 2. I want Tim to write something, and I remember I was like, even though Fallout had shipped by then it was the programmers who were super busy. We were patching so many things that people were finding yeah.

So I was like I remember I asked you and you're like hey, Jason and I wrote this and I'm like let's give it to Brian and Brian liked it I remember he came to office, he goes, I like what that was. But then he looked at me and goes: did you work on it? And I went: I I didn't want to take credit, but I knew what he was getting at. I kind of wanted to say yes, without taking any credit card. Well, I, I gave it I talked to the Leonard I get and he was like: I want you to write something, I want to see something that I know you've written. He said something: I want to see your hand in it and I was like I'm so busy. So I said, if you like that one, can I work with the writers on? That can I, can we do. He goes. Yeah, I just want to see your involvement. I'm like, okay, so that's when you went to your house.

Yeah, well, but then we sat down and we wrote Fallout 2 story. Yeah, like, um, we went to your house, um, well, the thing I wanted to say about that before I move on, was that it was a good story, but it was very contained too. It was like a direct sequel. It was. You were the same character from the base game. It kind of told a complete story about just that Vault and it was like, just like the name, vault 13. It was like it would have been cool, but it wasn't something that like was part of a franchisor sequel that you could then spin off. It was like that would have completed the story.

What I liked is you were the same character from the base game and you had all your skills and levels. You did not have an amnesiac moment where you were. You set the level one, but you still have the same name, which, anyway, and yeah so.

So we went to your house, me and Jason. You left work and we went to your house and we spent a day passing through a story.

Um. I know that I think on one of your videos you said we came up — I came up with the Geck way before that, but I could swear that like it was like the last minute I come into work. I'm like, have we sent the manual off? And Chris Taylor's like no, we don't.

I'm like, do we have another page? And he's like yeah, so I got terminal to draw the picture, I got Chris to write it and we put the Geck in there. I could swear that was after we hit that one day that we wrote the story. And that's why I love my notes, because — because we don't always agree on the content of my notes, but at least the dates — the manual for the game had to be printed well before the game, I believe before you ever even went off on your honeymoon, and what happened was we had an extra page and you had been thinking of things already and you wanted to put the Geck in there and I remember saying, as long as you have it by tomorrow. I mean you had a, severe deadline. It was like: anything you give me by tomorrow can go on that page, otherwise it's going to be this page left blank for intentionally for notes, and you got something let's see. And that doesn't make sense because we I could swear we — came up with the concept of that thing for the story anyway. So we're at your house and I remember we were going through it and we were trying to like we were big, huge X-Files fans at the time and I really loved also, um, uh, that was uh. This was 10 years after, but the Dark Knight Returns, the comic book as well.

Wells, Watchmen were huge. I used to be totally into comic books when I was a kid. I kind of drifted away from them, got back into him. One Dark Knight and Watchmen came out and the thing I loved about the Dark Knight was — and this is that people do this all the time now — but at the time it was kind of revolutionary, at least to me — was he took stuff that had been around for 40 years, 45 years probably. At that time — and he invented some stuff and he reconfigured some stuff, but a lot of it was stuff that had been around forever.

But no one really talked about the fact that he was obviously mentally unbalanced because his parents got killed. Like that's such a Trope now, but at the a, that's such a Trope now, but at the time it was like, yeah, he was fighting crime because of it, but he seemed like a straight, you know, regular stand-up citizen guy. Um so, and his relationship with different characters and how him and Superman were antagonistic, all that stuff was really interesting because it can recontextualize something we thought we knew. And so when we started talking about, uh, the sequel, and you brought up the thing I — this is another thing we misremember, or I, we don't remember the same as I could have sworn — you brought up somebody saying there's not enough vaults for all the people in the United States, and then we came up with the experiments thing, but you said you had discussed that with somebody else beforehand. Regardless, I already was about to say that at the meeting, but if you may have said it too — and we had it jointly, I just I brought it to the meeting. But yeah, it doesn't matter who said it, you put. The minute it was said, we were all like that's, awesome, because what we wanted to do — I remember exactly how it happened. We're like, okay, what's gonna happen?

You got to get the Geck, you got to get back to Vault 13.. So when you show up at vault 13, it's like this big moment and it's empty. And then we're like, okay, what happens then? Why is it empty? And that's when you threw that out, I guess.

Um, there were no death talking deathclaws in there. Some people online are going: well, this is a dumb idea, because why would they do the experiments after the bombs fell? Why wouldn't they do it before? And I'm like, because they were unethical and illegal.

Some of the experiments they had to do. There was no way you could have done that before the war. They would have been shut down immediately. I mean, some of the Vault ideas we had were out there. Plus, it was like you know, we didn't. We put a lot of thought into it, but we didn't.

Like you know, I. It's like people have gotten deep in the past 25 years in terms of analyzing every little piece, um, but what's interesting is a lot of things where getting kicked out of the vault is a perfect example. The Vault was totally xenophobic and they were talking about that. Forever. It wasn't like we came up with this idea out of the blue that you're going to kicked out of the Vault, like as we were talking about the impossibility of the party scene with the balloons.

We're just like me and Jason were just talking and I'm like you know what. They're so xenophobic, they would never let you back in. So we decided they would kick you out and that seemed like a great idea. But it was something that was based off stuff. We'd already done so a lot of times. That's kind of how we do things. We'll come up with interesting ideas and then they kind of take on a life of their own. So we kind of uh, blocked out the base uh story in one day.

And then I remember me and Jason: well, you impact the program and kind of fleshed it out. We kind of like, uh, took out a map and like, went, figured out where everything was to a certain degree. Degree um, I just, I remember back in Fallout one — I don't remember if I mentioned this the first time — where, we figured out the Brotherhood of Steel was somewhere like around Santa Barbara and they sent you to the glow, which was in San Diego, and we're like you're walking from Santa Barbara, yes, you are. So we kind of just hand waved that completely. Um, but on the second one, yeah, so me and Jason kind of finished, uh, working out the main story arc. Um, we wrote up some other quests, I think.

Um, you know, the jet thing was something I think Jason came up with, or maybe both. He came up with it, I think he came up with the name for that. Um, I wrote what was her name.

Lynette, uh, the Vault, the Vault City leader, yep um, which, after we left, Chris Avalon was, kind enough to take that on, and I think he did it and then put in the piece about me being a psychotic killer that had to get exiled from the vault. Um, but that was you know, so we did bits and pieces of it and then all the stuff went down with You know the discussions about what we're gonna do for Fallout 2 and all the stuff that happened. And you know we just didn't want to.

Fallout one was such a was such a great experience and you know we were already in our early 30s, we were like 31 or 32 and it chipped. So we, were still naive, but we weren't that young anymore. At least at the time we didn't think we were and I was, I had. Enough presence of mind while we were making it, even before we finished it, to like think like this is a really rare, unique opportunity, this never happens and this is not going to have. I, I kind of had this feeling that after this, nothing was going to be the same for us, and I was right, we couldn't.

And what's funny is I did not, because it's Eric DeMille likes to remind me a lot. I am always naively optimistic. I I thought, hey, this went great with Fallout. They're definitely going to want to the same thing for Fallout 2.. So now that we've proved ourselves, everyone's going to leave us alone.

No, okay, so so I wasn't thinking that it was going to come from the outside. I was just thinking this is a weird. It seemed like a weird moment in time and a weird set of circumstances and like things. That kept happening, you know, like the 50s thing, the Vault boy thing, the kicking him out of the Vault, the intro, like all that stuff, the vibe that the game ended up having. I'm like we can continue that, but it just seemed like this weird lightning in a bottle thing, um. So I just felt like, you know, and it was our first, so I felt like you know, this is, even if it's great, it's not going to be the same as the first one. And then, when everything started happening — and you know I was because I was naive too — you know — I thought, with us getting Awards and all that stuff, that we were proving something we were proving like, if you take creative people who were responsible and give them a budget, you know, and make sure they don't go off the rails, but let them kind.

Of do their thing. You know people who have a vision for what they want to make. Um, that's how you do it, that's how you get great gains. I think we both learned since then that you have to prove yourself over and over and over again to new people who haven't done it but think they have a better idea. And you're just like: okay, let's spend a lot, of, a large amount of time chewing on these ideas that we've chewed on before, but we're chew on them now with you, like the Temple of Trials, as you pointed out.

We'd already plan to have that, but yeah, as I remember it, was completely optional and skippable and there were dialogue methods too. It wasn't just supposed to be a Combat tutorial and all that it was. Basically, we want some cool way for you to get a jumpsuit or you could. Yeah, you could — skip the whole thing.

Well, and again, you know the, ending, even though we came up with it without really thinking we were riffing off the road, warrior, um, you always got to riff off the road, where at least I do, um. So so the beginning of um Fallout 2, where I think that was one of the things that that really influenced us, is, you know, as I said last time we talked, the um, you know the ending of, at the ending of Road Warrior turns it kind of like into a legend or a myth, and so we're like, oh, the Vault dweller is now a legend or a myth. So, and your and your tribe has got they made them a little bit more primitive than we originally envisioned them. I did the guy with the Mohawk, I'm like I made the new character. For that — um, the actual modeling and animating and texture wrapping. But um, yeah, you're supposed to be able to just walk up there and use speech skills to get the Vault suit and become like the new Baltimore or whatever. And that's why I mean a big turning point for me on Fallout 2 — and I talked about a little bit — was you had done a really cool new cover for the box, which I assumed.

Of course we're going to do the Box. We did the box for the first one. Why wouldn't the same team do the box for the second one?

And I remember going to that meeting and it was a cool box. Do you remember it was like, yeah, it was a power armor, but it was done up tribally, Sir, yeah, it's. They use it as a loading screen in Fallout 2.. I thought it was perfect, because it had the Fallout Vibe, one Vibe. But it made you go.

What's going on? Why? Why are there feathers in that? And what happened to the glass of?

Why is that guy look like, I mean, he's wearing a bone necklace or something. And I went to that meeting all excited and I left that meeting so incredibly dejected because I was effectively told someone I've never seen before looked at me and went, oh, we've already done the cover. I'm like, well, we've got to cover. Because she was like: nope, this discussion is closed, it has been decided. And I was just like: who are you, let's go. And I remember looking at the head of marketing, Kurt green, and I was just like what is what's going on? And he was like sympathetic but he's like, well, things have to be done a certain way.

Now, blah, and it was a bit done. And oh, we should have kept you in the loop that we made that decision. And I'm like, no, no, I'm in the loop for the decision. And he was like, well, you know what I mean? Um, that phrase was uttered so much in those few months, you know what I mean, which was basically that was a very polite way.

People above me had to say shut up. And it was a very strange thing because for three years we, I know, was crazy, we kind of did what we want, wanted. But look what happened.

You would think they'd be like I hardly lifted a finger and this group made us something great. I think I would be great if I didn't lift a finger again. And they made us a second thing. That was great. That's how I thought about it, but instead of like my fingers need to go into this, so hot pie, yeah, so, but you know that's. I think that's something that that everybody can relate to. Everybody who's ever done something creative from their heart that they've been working with a bigger company on, I think, has experienced that to some degree in another. Uh, unless they're smarter business than businessmen than we were — and we've talked about this else elsewhere. But then, you know, I gave my resignation and you and Jason gave your resignation.

We had no intention of starting a company. I mean, the last thing on our mind was: oh, we're all businessmen, let's spin up a company. We were like, let's just go somewhere else or, you know, figure out whether opportunities are out there. It was so odd that we ended up making a company. We were there was, we were the last, were we? Were there was.

We were the last people who wanted to even leave. I loved working at interplay. Um, this was a time when people were starting companies, selling companies. It was like people were making all this money. People were leaving constantly because you can get more money other places. And I kept saying, you know so you get ten thousand dollars more a year. You know over the like every paycheck. What is that? You know it's really valuable to work at some place that you love working at.

I was always like a big, a big cheerleader for interplay and I had no desire to leave. I had no desire to start my own company. I felt like they kind of left us with no choice at the end and as soon as you decided to leave, it was just like, well, we're not going to stay, but, um, we really wanted.

To do. We kind of wanted to go like, oh, where's our new home? We just want to find another place that wants to make an RPG like Fallout. And they'll hire all of us and me and you and Jason will start the team and we'll just do it again some other place, um, and we couldn't find that place, um, and unfortunately, or unfortunately, during that time, you're like: I don't want to be the person that deals with any of this anymore. So I naively said, don't worry about it, Tim, I'll take care of it. So I was the one who was cold calling people and trying to get us contracts and dealing with all that stuff. And you know, we, went to a bunch of different places and you know, finally we ran into Scotland — she was running Sierra at the time — and, um, he was, he hadn't worked.

In her place. Somebody who was working with had worked in her play at the time, in marketing, I think, um, I don't remember, was it? But Genevieve? No, she was, she was, she was working at Sierra, but she wasn't at this meeting. I mean, the first meeting we went to, there was someone there who we were had worked with in our play.

Um, so I apologize because I I forgotten who else was there, but Scott was great. Scott like totally got what we were trying to do. I mean, we had to kind of at that point, I think we kind of come to the conclusion that we had to start our own company. But Scott like loved Fallout. He totally wanted us to come make another game. We already knew that we wanted to make the industrial revolution of fantasy world thing.

Um, he loved our ideas, he's you. Know, we pitched him on this thing. He kind of went to contract with us, um, and Scott was, and again, we were naive because, you know, we're just like we're dealing with Scotland. I mean, yeah, it's a company, but we're dealing with Scotland. I mean, one of the things that happened was he had said: okay, if you guys sell this many units, you'll make this much money in royalties. And he kind of gave us the breakdown and me and Jason were going through those numbers and they were wrong and we called them up and he's like: you know what you're right, I was, that's wrong. So to make it up to you guys, I have to put the right numbers in there. But to make it up for me guys, like for people who don't know how it works, it's kind of like the record company they treat like.

The money you make to make your game like an advance and you have to pay back through royalties that they give you not all the money the game makes, but like the small percentage that you get has to. You have to recoup that on your small percentage, forget about whatever ever else they've made off of it, and once you've — quote unquote — paid that back through your percentage, then you start making royalties. So but what Scott Lynch did, he says, is like you guys are making 10 cents on the dollar for your royalties from unit one and that's the only time that Troika we ever got any kind of royalties because he did that for us. I tried to get us at one point in time I tried to guess the uh Arcanum license from Sierra when we were kind of winding Troika down and they wanted like a million dollars. Or 1.5 million dollars or something for it, and they said something about us still owing them money. Um, you know, it's all the bookkeeping stuff, but it was just.

Do you remember — because this is a question people ask enough — what the inspiration was for the Troika logo? As I told him, the name came from us being called the Troika at yeah, I don't. I wanted it to have the kind of World War II. Look, there's a picture I I ripped off for it I don't know where it was, um, it was kind of like um, yeah, it was very graphic, it was I don't think it was Russian, but had that very worker 1930s workers, Vibe, um, you know, and we kind of had that weird, um, attitude.

Well, we're just going to get a whole bunch of creative people who all do. What they do really well, we're not gonna have any managers, We're not gonna have any producers, everybody's gonna make the same amount of money.

And my father, who was helping us, set this whole thing up and started calling us Communists. That had nothing to do with their name, um, because I am of a proud Russian Heritage, or at least Eastern European, um, but so we, started working on that and that that kind of idea, and then so I came up with that logo. We went through the whole thing of copywriting it and then Jason, like in an afternoon, tossed out a better logo, that like Gear with the Troy again, and I'm like he did that to me with the loading screens too, like I spent all that time painting that loading screen for Fallout 2, and then he like took that, that, like that test pattern and through please stand by on it. He's like I'm like, dude, you suck man, you just you totally made a better one than me and I spent like two weeks on it and you spent like five minutes on it I remember what I liked about it was. I remember I said that first of all it was black and white, so I saw this ending, you saw. But also that meant it worked well for not just a logo on a screen, but it worked well on our business cards and stationery. And I'm like: okay, this is good.

And the reason it was pointing to design was because you know you can have decent programming, decent art, but if your diet design isn't great, your game isn't going to be great. We didn't think design was more the most important. It was just: you gotta have it. And people sometimes skimp on it. Yeah, well, especially back then, people would come up with a really cool like, graphical thing, yeah, that that you could write a cool, you could write a whole engine around, and then they're like: well, let's glue a story or some kind of an idea onto it I think that, um, it also has to do with, even though we are artists and you're a programmer. I feel like — and this is for very weird for me to say, because I never thought of myself like this before — I kind of had to start writing. I feel like we were all like: uh, you know, we had.

Well, Jason was just pure talent, he didn't have any teaching, but I went to school for art, you went to school for programming, you're a great designer, and I feel almost like you're a designer first, like I would go to you and ask: you for things and you would always be like, if you couldn't do it, you'd be like, well, what are you trying to do? And I would tell you and you would say, well, I can't give you what you're asking for, but I can get 90 of the way there and it's much easier for us to do and you'll get all this other stuff. So you would always try to get figure out what we were trying to do from a design standpoint. You almost made your. How you set up the, tools and everything on Arcanum was definitely from a design standpoint. So I feel like we were all focused on making sure that that was being handled. A that was that that was being handled.

A lot of the tools on Arcanum came from the that. I watched people struggle with the tools on Fallout. So yeah, script maker, sock monkey. Script maker was intended to let anyone be able to script and our world editor was intended that anybody, if you could draw a rectangle, it would find all the wall pieces, insert windows and doors, put a roof on it that, that editor, that editor, was amazing. All the tools you guys made, I it was.

It's so sad that, like, the time of tiled games was already over by the time we shipped, because that was, it was so easy to make a game. Like going back to interplay — another very lucky thing that happened is so this guy, Chad Moore um, had started working at interplay. He, we, always we were trying to look for new 3D artists. It was really hard to find 3D artists, um. He was an economics major at Columbia University, of all things, and his friend there was learning how to program sgis and he needed somebody to do some art on Maya, I mean, on uh Power animator. So he made a rollerblade, a rollerblade that you that like rotated or something.

He sent that to us and it was better than anything we'd seen. And so we're like, well, it's hired, this guy, and he had his great artistic sense, but he was a great writer. Carbine to be a writer? Yeah, because he was a fantastic writer.

If anybody ever looked at you find it on YouTube. You can watch kurgan's speech. Yeah, um, that he gives. That makes you kind of go. I think the villain might be right. I think I might be on the wrong side.

I mean, here's somebody who wants to destroy all of life on the planet, but you end up going. He has a point. Yeah, Chad wrote that whole thing. Yeah, and he also had the unforgivable task. Of, uh, like, doing that last conversation with him where, depending on which combination of followers you had, um, it would change drastically, like some of them would abandon you, yeah, um, and so that was a pain.

So he did that, Ann kurgan, which was just fantastic work. But again, you know, he had never done this before, so he, came over to join us once we got. Well, first, you know the, stepping back — I'm jumping ahead here — so we were still working at interplay. I think we'd already put in our, notices, and my wife gets pregnant. And then, oh, Jason's like, yeah, we're, we were talking about it, but we're gonna wait a while. And then a week later he comes in. He's like: yo, we're pregnant too, so a week, they were born actually a week apart, or even less than that, um, but so both our wives were pregnant or I don't think they were married at the time. But we left with no, no job, nothing. We're just like what word? We have to do this?

Um, again, you know, it's great when you're. You can do that when you're 30 years old and just like I'm gonna take the risk, I'm rolling the dice. Well, okay, I had no one pregnant, but I had a mortgage and I refinanced a few months after we quit just because I needed some money and I needed to get my monthly cost down. So I had to reset the mortgage on my house back several years just to be able to survive. Because at the very beginning — and I remember this happened — we miscalculated some of our startup costs. Yeah, so, even though we said everybody was going to get paid the same amount, you and Jason and I got paid. About half it was taxes we had. Because we kept telling our accountant we're like, just give us a salary, you can't do that. This is an LLC, you guys are owners, you can't draw a salary. We're like, just give us a salary. And so like we got paid what everybody else was. And then he came to us at the end and he's like, well, here's what you guys owe in taxes. We're like, how do we owe that in taxes? Yeah, because all the money that, because we had all the money that the company brought in — was our money. So but anyway, the reason it reminded me of that is because we were in me and you and Jason — and I think Chris Jones was with us too at that point — were in Jason's house making a demo, making our green light um demo for that. And you know we started learning.

How to use Maya. We switched over to Maya because Maya could run on PCS. We couldn't afford sgis, obviously, and we power animator was, you know, starting to be phased out, so he started using Maya. Maya was for me, it's like I've been. I learned how to model and animate and texture on uh, Power animator.

Moving over to Maya was really tough for me. I mean it was. We got up and running pretty quick and I know Jason's — you know — technical whiz, so he never had a problem with it and I felt like I did good work on it. But there was something where it never quite fully clicked the way power animator did for me. Um, but I still like what we did and the tools you guys came up with were amazing, like we were saying.

An example of that is perspective, for me, power animator was. Really hard for me to do any tools for. I remember that's why you had to copy all the channels by hand. When you were doing that on Maya, I was like: hold on a second. I was like there, here's a script you can run that'll copy all your channels for you. It was just, it was a programmer's dream, yeah, in terms of being able to script stuff that you would have to do by hand. So we had, yeah, so we were doing that. We were doing the, green light demo, as they the green light demo, as they call it, which is basically us doing a demo to see if they're gonna continue with the contract. We had a contract, it was a signed contract, but you have to deliver this thing called the green light demo, where they're gonna like give you the green light or not to. Make the game, so we're making that.

At the end of that, you know, my wife gives birth. That week later, Jason's wife gives birth.

We're trying, you know, we're trying to do paternity leave while at the same time trying to make sure we get this thing done. Um, and then that was the reason — we had a nursery at Troika. Yes, for the first five years — four years, five years, was it? Our kids grew up at Troika, which was really great. You know, when we take breaks, me and Jason could go in there and play with the kids. I remember I adopted that dog, the German Shepherd mix that had been abused and I was worried Howard be with the kids and he was absolutely fine. He would just go in there and sit. I think it was Gwen once grabbed him and like, pulled out a tuft of hair.

Well, no, they were trying to. They were trying to stand. At the time they were learning how to walk and stand, so they would like climb up and it would just sit there and let him.

Yeah, he was like whatever, and it was really awesome because you guys got to bring in your kids and I got to bring in my dog. Yeah, it was. It was great, um, so, anyways, the reason I brought up Chad was because you know, Chad had written. Chad actually was really into writing his whole life. He was kind of like I was with art, except he decided to be an economist for some reason at the last minute and he came over to work with us. And so you're putting together this uh, sock monkey script maker for us, and it was so funny because you would come in there and tell us how it was going to.

Work — and I don't know if Chad understand it, understood it — but you would tell me things like I understood what you were talking about and I'd be like yeah, okay, that sounds great. You're like, well, here's how it's gonna work, isn't this great? I'm like that sounds fantastic, and I didn't understand it until I started working with it was — and I've actually done real scripting after that in like Python and stuff. But this was the greatest scripting tool ever because it was all pull Downs. You couldn't have — um, you know, you couldn't make spelling errors, you couldn't, you know, mistype anything.

Um, it was really, really powerful, and you regretted the power you gave me and Chad on that game. I swear I thought I had restricted it, but the foot out. I thought I'd prevented.

You guys do anything bad, and one of the first things: you did was you put in a, loop and if we started calling other scripts, they called back to the same script. Oh, and that blew the Heap. It was just a which script? They just, it was just a, which script. They would call B, which called back into B, A and back to a, b, a, b, yeah.

But and I thought, like you, guys didn't have to deal with pointers or memory allocation and I thought, great, it's, immune to tampering. Neither one of us had ever scripted before. We had.

I'd only written Fallout. He'd written, you know, he worked. He did writing for red asphalt, which was the first game he'd ever worked on. He came over there.

We're like, oh, you're gonna write an RPG now. He's like great, and he did a fantastic job. And we, both, we not only wrote the stuff, we scripted it. We ended up laying out Maps because our map maker was so easy to use.

See, we had really good scriptures on Fallout and we knew we weren't going to have any budget for that, yeah. So sock monkey was kind of an act of desperation.

It's like I need to make something that everybody can script in quickly. That lets us to, and I knew what you wanted to do with it. Like I was like: oh yeah, they're gonna wanna test items and creatures in the environment and check for properties and set things and give items and set variables. It was pretty straightforward what I knew you had to do. I just wanted to come up with a way of doing it that was, I thought, as safe as possible.

Yeah, and it was. I never, ever thought in a million years I'd be able to script, because I had zero technical ability. I had zero mathematical ability, but that and the way you um set up our conversation stuff, I mean it was the worst part about it was that it was in Excel. So we were doing these branching conversations that had all these different branchings and linked in different ways and it was really hard to follow on Excel.

But you also gave us the ability to really easily check everything we ever wanted to check by local flags and Global Flags. But we just write literally gf05 or whatever, because it was all in a text file that we would open up and just there was our list of global flags and we just write what it was and we do it. And we had local flags and we used within that conversation. Um, the other thing you did was like every object in the game you had you could.

Open up its script. I don't even know what it was. It was just this, thing with checkboxes on it where you could attach scripts to all the different things that that object could do, and it was contextual. So if it was an item that could do certain things, if it was an NPC, it could do certain things. So we didn't have to script any of that. We could say like, okay, the this script fires when this happens and we just attach it to that point. And we didn't have, so that was like it made it so easy to do that stuff. And you know, me and Chad and Jason would go crazy where we were just like everything we could do we did. It's like — I know you've heard it, I you've referred to it as our kitchen sink game — but like, literally, as we were writing these conversations, it was so easy to do. I would just be like, oh, I remember when this happened there I'm like I'm gonna do this later and I just I just start throwing in like every line had some kind of conditional where it's just like, oh, did the player do this?

Oh, they can do this. Um, weird things like that tall bank robbery thing that I put together with, and you're just like: what are you doing? I remember you guys went beyond doing things that I thought you could do and you went into things that I wasn't sure you should do. But we definitely wouldn't have done a lot of that stuff. But it turned out to have, I mean, people talk about all the different ways you can do some of the quests, because they're just there were so many builds possible that that you couldn't just say: here's how you fight, talk. And stealth your way. It's like they're remarkable ways to talk your way past it, multiple ways to fight, um.

What we have to talk about, you know what I have to talk about now? Yes, how about quests and scripting? The number one asked question, or Arcanum, was what was up with the whole half ogre island quest line that I believe you wrote.

That's yes, well, it started off with the Siamese twins, right, the Siamese twin skull. Somehow it was half Chad's and half mine.

I don't remember. I don't even remember, so I believe that's how you evented ended up getting into it.

So Chad wants to put the front end on it, um, because I think he wrote that part. But yeah, that idea was mine and the I and the execution was mine, especially the end of it. Um, and the island. I did the island stuff and um, a lot of people didn't know was it designed not to be finishable or did you just not finish it? No, it was designed to be a dead end, because it was.

We were again. We were full on X-Files fans. Chad used to come over to our house at night and you know, on Sunday nights, and Watch X-Files, um, every week literally. And so we were big on X-File stuff and we're like we're gonna. You know, you can't figure this out till the sequel. And then we started talking about Journey to the Center of Arcanum.

I'm like, how am I gonna fit that in there? This, doesn't fit with the new game we're making. But yeah, the idea was that it was gonna, that it was gonna be a dead end, that you weren't going to be able to fix it.

The powers that be. Were gonna, you know, basically shut it all down and use kind of a lesson that, yeah, not every problem can be solved, yeah, but uh, there's a follow-up that a lot of people asked is: would you make content like that today? Probably not, um, because, first of all, I know more now I really thought there was no way we weren't making a sequel to it. So I mean, we might plant things that could pay off later, but you wouldn't just like Easter eggs where, um, if you don't get the reference or the joke, you shouldn't have seen it same thing with us planning things for later. Um, if you don't, you know, you shouldn't think that things are unfinished or not, or left hanging in any way, shape or form. If we can avoid it, um, but yeah, I don't think that's because people want to finish it. People want the closure, and I think I could have done it in a way that was more obvious. Closure, I feel like players would should at least get a small win, even if they couldn't solve the whole thing. They should have had felt like they had a win, and I don't feel like they had a win in it. Um, and there was also kind of you know the — I think people read anti-semitic things into it at one point, because, yeah, because you know, unfortunately, in fantasy, gnomes have big noses and are short and they like money which didn't come from us, and I don't know if that was racist when it first was developed, but that's a fantasy thing. But I thought, you know, first of all, we didn't think that far into it, and I did think about that, though, when I was developing the question.

I'm like you. Know what? I have the perfect defense about that because I'm Jewish so I can, because it's not meant, it wasn't intended, but I did have in the back of my mind. I wonder if people are going to read this as some kind of weird conspiracy thing. And that's speaking of conspiracy thing.

That's the other thing, and — and you know this was we shift in August of 2001.. And before was a completely different world from after September of 2001..

Conspiracies were funny, conspiracies were like X-Files, like a lot of fun. No one could possibly believe this stuff. It was a totally different world where we're like: oh, we could totally play around with this in this make-believe world and No One's Gonna draw a real world implications from it. You know, maybe the bigger themes say something about power and stuff, but I mean, in terms of the details, no one's going to read too much into that and of course, that is not the case at all. So I would be a lot more careful on a lot of that stuff.

Yeah, it is. It is strange. It's like I've talked about this in a few other videos I've done.

It's really hard to use today's lens to look at things back then. Yeah, and in some ways I kind of even want to warn people. It's like, however you think you are now and you think you're good and well-meaning and all that, in 20 or 30 years people are going to look at things you do and go: how dare you drive an internal combustion card, or yeah, but I think it's going to happen, which is they're going to make Fabricators and people can't believe we wore the same clothes multiple times.

Um, which I'm trying not to do. I'm trying to wear. A different shirt every video, um, because that's how I roll. No, you know, there are many ways I roll and that is one of the role methods.

Um, do you remember any other content from Arcana? People have asked a lot about, hey, what else didn't make it in, and I just remember almost every idea we ever had getting into that game. I think we did. I mean even things that we didn't. I don't know. I can't think of any.

I think we changed some stuff. I know that once Chad came on — because he didn't start with us immediately, he was in there very early on, but I think after he came on, um, two things happened: uh, planescape came out, planescape torment, and we're just like East, we're gonna have to up our game, because planescape tournament was, you know, the best writing ever. And we're just like, uh, we're gonna have to be really good, gonna, we're gonna have to be really good. We thought we had to be good before, but now we have to be, you know, try to do something that could even, you know, be compared to that. And then, um, I think it was Memento, that moving Memento.

Is that right? I don't know if that was too early, maybe I remember misremembering movie, but I love the. You know the twisting and turning paths through there. And I was looking at our story and I'm like I don't think, because originally aeronax was the actual bad guy.

There was no kurgan, which was a temp name we never replaced. It was the guy from Highlander. We're just, we just call them it's the Kerrigan. We'll figure out a better name for him, although let me just interject fallouts plot. Florida went through. Three main plot points. Yeah, Arcata went through 27.. I think we had made a sufficiently detailed and detailed, but it was like I don't think there was enough places where things happened that you weren't expecting. It felt like it was kind of like you knew ahead of time it was going to happen and sure it played out in interesting ways, but I didn't feel like there was. So me and Chad did some stuff where we kind of like recontextualized some things and added some twists and turns to it, um, but I think I feel like everything we wanted to put in there, we put in there, um, you know, the magic versus Tech. I mean, I was talking earlier about being naive and I didn't finish that part of the story because one of the reasons I said I was we were naive is because we were dealing with Scott and we're like: well, Scott can be completely trusted, Scott's, Scott's Great, you know, um, Sierra seems really cool, but Scott's, you know, we're making this deal with Scott and then, six months into it, Scott left because I don't remember why, but he left, um, Sierra, I don't, it wasn't acrimonious, he was, there wasn't any big problem or anything, he just needed to leave for whatever reason, and he eventually ended up at valve, which helped us down the road. But, um, you know, and, the people who worked at Sierra were great, but they weren't.

That wasn't the relationship we had with Scott and I feel like Scott hired us to kind of do what we wanted to do, which is be left alone to make our game. But I kind of feel like maybe I was wrong, maybe I was just you know. Reading too much into it, but I kind of feel like Scott would have like given us a lot of really great feedback on our game and I feel like, you know, we didn't get. I felt like Sierra had so much faith in us that they really didn't give us a lot of um, give us any critique. They didn't ever go like what's the? What the hell's with the black mountain mines or caves, whatever the hell they were, that you have to spend an hour in, yeah, or just on system mechanics? I I always expected somebody go.

Did you really need fate points and the newspaper and you know, all the other stuff that we jammed into the game? Do we need all of them? So that's something that me and you completely disagree about, I think. I think the newspapers were awesome. Oh, I love that they're there frosting on.

Its already heavily sugared cake. I, I was just. I love the tools, though again, I can't, I can't praise them enough. This, seems so trivial now, but at the time, you know, you gave us something where we had an image and we could change the logo, we could change the typeface, we could have different type faces, and this stuff was generated on the fly off of a text file so it could be completely reactive to what the player did: images on it. If you didn't do anything, I would just procedurally generate a newspaper that seemed appropriate for the time. That was awesome, I mean, and again it's like I feel like if only if this game had shipped like we couldn't have done it obviously three or four years before, because we're still working on Fallout, but if it had been a little bit ahead of.

The curve, I think people would have and we had maybe made it a little less buggy. I think I like that we had all this stuff in there. Yeah, I just pause it that perhaps we had so much stuff in there. That's true, the bugs and the fact that we didn't need all that stuff to have been a good game. Well, we let you our we reached our goal, which was we want the players to be able to do anything they want, including stupid things like I'm gonna play a dwarf who's a magic user. You know, it's just like we kind of let you make characters that you couldn't finish the game with and we had. I mean, there was no way to adequately play test that game, I think. I think, uh, Sierra did a great job play testing it I don't know that they would have had. I don't know how many years or how many people they would have needed to test that game, because it's like, literally like I said when me and Chad were writing these dialogues, every time we thought of something you could do, we would put it in.

It's like we had no editors in terms of like, is this a good idea or not? It's a good idea because we can do it. Tim gave us all this power with the scripting engine. I feel like, the dumb dialogue in Fallout was this fun stuff that was sprinkled through, yeah, and then on Arcanum, you guys doubled down on it and you literally almost made an entire path through the game for the dumb player. And my favorite line is when you, the player, are talking to some other NPC and you say Virgil says I'm impotent because you literally don't know the word important and it was, it was just it was awesome, it was great, was it was awesome, it was great and I I don't want it not to be in there.

I just questioned, with all the stuff that we get put in, maybe some of the things we could have reserved for a sequel. But I mean, I'm glad because there was no sequel, I'm glad it all got in, but we, drove ourselves slightly insane. Well, the thing that was different for me and Jason was we did all of our art. So we met originally in Fallout with you know the five, six people who did the original concept for it and kind of like came up with the basic design for the game, did that. Me and Jason went off and were just artists. We ran the art team. We did all as much art as we could.

Um, you know stuff we'd never done before, like I talked about the last video. We did all that stuff and then we were pretty much done with the art and then I had to become a writer. Um well, thank you, but on Arcanum, I'm like doing every portrait in the game. I'm like do I did every male model texture, I mean for the hero ones, for them in all the races. I did the male the all the races. I did the male versions. Jason did the female versions which, by the way, I remember one day I was trying to move files and I deleted — I had just finished — all the mail animations and I deleted them all and me and Jason stayed there that whole night recreating him.

Luckily, the second time you do it's easier because I remembered. But so Jason actually ended up doing a bunch of the male ones, but I had done the original pass. So I'm doing that.

We're trying to figure out how to run a company. We're trying to figure out everything else about the game. I'm trying to now write. I think I wrote a third of the game — maybe 34, 40, 35, 40 — I don't know what I wrote. Chad wrote way more than half, um, because that's all he did for the whole project and oh and that's — I don't know if you've mentioned this before — the fact that we had 14 people work on this game. Yeah, a total of 14 people, and one of them was an intern. It's like: so, our team — I think our actual team — was like 10 or 11, and then we had two or three more people who were interns, or okay, about 30 people at the end. So, yeah, we did not have that heavy lifting at the end, yeah, um, and Sharon, you know, Sharon was uh Jason's uh wife to be was our office manager.

She was working at blizzard. She came over to work for us, which I I think that I think she shows that a blizzard, but I mean I loved having her there, but I was like you said it too.

Oh, that's right, you wanted to ask me at one point about the uh movies in Fallout and me and Jason did the intro with the help of Shellman. Sharon Shellman did some work on that for us too, and then the outro was the one I did. Jason, Jason did some. I think Jason did them over running the Vault, but the mutants over running the Vault, but we had hired this outside company to do, um, the Vault Running Out of Water, um, you being dipped in the Vats, things like that, and they just weren't doing it. At the Quality we wanted, so Jason took it home one weekend and he came back and he showed it to me. I'm like that's way better and he's like I didn't do it I showed Sharon how to use 3D Studio and she did it and I'm like I don't care who did this?

Fire those people. Give Sharon a contract. She's going to help us out with this. So she did like the water chip stuff and being dipped to the vet. She did some great work for us, um, and she did. I don't know how much art she did on Arcanum, but she did writing. She did the brothel and I remember that distinctly because — because, if you want somebody to write some really dirty stuff, have a girl write it, yeah well, I mean, I have a similar story, like at the end of Fallout, when we were trying to track down that horrible crash bug and Mark Harrison was a contractor and helped me do it. So we brought him on as a programmer on Arcanum because, you know, I love the fact that we found people who were just incredibly passionate and focused on what they did and we had some incredibly talented people, who were multi-telling.

In your example, we just had people who wore multiple hats — a lot of companies. Today you're hired to do one thing. That's the Hat you wear.

Don't touch anything else. It's even insulting if you touch anything else.

That was not how Troika worked. In Troika, if you were good at something, do it didn't matter if it had. You had no training and I should be clear about this. We told Sharon what we wanted. It wasn't like she just ran wild with the brothels, so she was, you know. She was doing the stuff that were, but it was, she was kind of running with our attitude of like, do whatever you want.

Who did the shoot? I do not remember. I think Sharon implemented it I think it was like I don't remember whose idea it was. Oh okay, but hey, we all thought it was a fantastic idea. It was funny.

Um, we said that in Fallout, half the stuff we did was just to make exactly so doing this, while we've got to talk about vampire, okay, people were, um, they wanted to know some questions about vampire. I'm hesitant to go into vampire because, just like Temple was rough for me personally, yeah, vampire was rough for you. So I will let you say anything and any everything you want to say about that before I then ask you some of the questions that people.

How long we've been, how long? Have we been talking today? 55 minutes, all right. Um, yeah, I don't know how much we want to get into vampire. Do you want to try to do we want to talk again and talk about vampire? We can do um, because we did a bunch of stuff. Yeah, we could only come back and do well, you, because we didn't jump right from our kids.

So our, because there's a bunch of interesting stuff. I think that happened at the end of our Canaan, like that transitioned us to um, to the Empire, that were really important. Um, so I, we finished it up and I remember, when we started working on The Outer Worlds, we were talking about the past and things that we've done and I said, you know, I liked working on Fallout a lot more than Arcanum. I loved Arcanum, but I, you know our Canon.

Was the first one and all that and I really was. You know, I really loved it, and you said you liked working on Arcana better and I I came to the conclusion that it was like on Fallout you were dealing with everything outside of the team and on our Canaan, even though Sierra was great to work with, I was dealing with everybody outside of the team. I'm sure that has nothing to do with our feelings on those two games is the fact that, like, one of us was totally just doing the game work and the other one was dealing with everything else. I have a funny story: nameless who called me about two months after I left interplay, someone on The Fallout team who just went.

How did you deal with all these people coming into your office all hours of the day complaining about stuff and I'm like with a smile, and he was just like I can't deal with it I can't, literally. I have people in here asking me change things and to do things differently and all and he goes. I just can't deal with it.

I'm like now, you know that was one of the many services I provided besides baked goods. That was one of many services and you had to do that.

Yeah, on Arcanum, so we were so naive. You know, Sierra, whenever they talked about us in the Press, our announcement, all that stuff they always talked about, this was an IP and it was going to keep going. And the first time I heard something weird was like I went up there — I don't remember what I was up there for, probably PR stuff or something — and, um, the rpr person said, oh, the game's selling really well, it looks really good for you guys.

Doing a sequel, and I'm like what, do you mean? It looks really good for us doing a sequel. I thought that was part of like our thing and it didn't do good enough to do a sequel, it turns out. So then we got the Lord of the Rings thing.

Well, remember too, we didn't know this at the time because we had our heads buried in the sand. Financially, Sierra was not doing that, well, yeah, so, yeah, I don't remember what time that, whether they're part of sentient at that point or what was going on. I think that's when all the sales happened.

And yeah, um, Ken Williams was not going to be involved. Yeah, I don't, I don't know, we weren't, he didn't know any stuff. Yeah, we were completely isolated from that. But so we started, so we couldn't do, did, uh, did, Arcanum.

Two with the Half-Life 2 engine come before or after the? No, it must. It must have come after, uh, the Lord of the Rings. We started, well, we had ideas for our kingdom too, found out we weren't going to do that, but they had the Lord of the Rings license.

Yeah, ask that to us. We made that demo, which I've shown. Yeah, well, because I, I feel like we had pitched using the Half-Life 2 engine early, because of that, because we pitched a few engines, because, remember, Tech and I tested unreal, so because they weren't going to do it, they weren't going to do arcane2, or at least at that point they didn't think they were going to do it.

And I called Scott. I said, hey, Scott, you know, this is what the situation is and he's like you guys should use the source engine, and so the. Most surreal thing was, you know, me and Jason were up in Seattle get in a car with Scott Lynch and Gabe Newell drive to Sierra and me and Jason were like flies on the wall watching Gabe argue with the head of Sierra about how they were going to publish our game or not publish our game. They were going to use their engine and we're just like what's going on here? How are we, how are we part of this? And then that that didn't pan out.

Um, so that's when I think we started doing Lord of the Rings, and I'll it'll become evident in a minute why. I think that's the way it happened. So we started, well, there was also a lot of other pitches we did. I found a bunch of them, like Shadowrun, and I know you talked about my magic 10.. I could look.

At the dates on some of those folder of pitches and also that's I want to throw in two — that when we did Lord of the Rings it was the Arcanum engine but we took out all the Sprites and we placed them with 3D characters. Yes, so we're doing the Lord of the Rings one and I went up to Seattle to they were going to have they were doing a bunch of Lord of the Rings games. So they were having a meeting where a bunch of people from a bunch of representatives from the different teams working on these games we're gonna meet and kind of talking about, talk about what each were doing and making sure you know, we're kind of like complimenting what others doing and not doing the same thing too much. And you know, before I go into the meeting I get pulled into our producer's office and he effectively told me: stuff's going really, really bad here there. I you know they were shutting them down — I don't remember where they were in the process, but he saw the writing on the wall and he knew that we weren't going to be doing Lord of the Rings. And so then I had to go sit in this meeting where we were acting like we were going to do it. And then I immediately got out of that meeting and I called you and Jason and I'm like we don't have a contract, we're done.

We have nothing. We had like we had no more money coming in. We had nothing going on.

We had like two weeks to make payroll and, you know, five months to get landed contract, which is what it took us the first time and we didn't realize that was rare. Usually it takes a year, a year and a. Half, two years to get a contract. We did it in five months the first time. So we're like, oh, that's, you know, that was. That was fine, we have two weeks to make payroll.

So again I called Scott Lynch, who is who is the savior of Troika, and he's like: oh, we're talking to Activision, about making a game with them, making a game with the source engine. You guys should talk to him about doing that. And like, within two weeks we were working on vampire and we had money and we never missed a payroll. And independent guys came by, yeah, and that's when one of them said to me: so remember this, he goes. We loved Fallout so much that the Third Edition Feats in d are based on Fallout perks, and I was just like oh, and I — I just realized I misspoke earlier the Lord of the Rings engine had Sprites but non-tired backgrounds. We had fully rendered backgrounds. Yeah, because it was Temple that then said, okay, we have fully rendered backgrounds, let's add 3D characters. It was like you could, from Arcanum to Lord of the Rings to Temple, you could see the evolution of this engine that we were putting together. But one of them, the middle one, Lord of the Rings, didn't get made.

Should we just jam through the rest of it? Because I don't know how many stories I have from Vampire that we, really want to talk about it. Let's jam it and then, okay, people might have more.

So the vampire was a bit of a rough development, yes, you want to talk about. So we had the contract going for vampire and they came to us and to talk about doing Temple, and we generally would not have done that. However, me and Jason were sure that Activision would eventually walk away from the source engine, because it was taking a long time for them to work out the details. We're just like I don't know what's going on there, but we just had this feeling. It seemed like, you know — I mean, I think everybody knows, at least in the industry — you don't want to work on a game with an unfinished engine. We do that, but we're like: if this is the only way we can do this game, well, we never did that for ourselves. You guys made stuff while we were literally still putting the code together, yeah, but we. But if it's an unfinished engine that somebody else is making, it's out of your hands completely, um. But so we thought that eventually the whole thing was going to fall apart. So that's why we're like: well, we need. A backup, so that's why we took that.

And then, when it started to look like both were going to happen, and I told, not that we needed to tell them this, but I told them, you know, just for full disclosure, that we were also doing that they key manned me and Chad and Jason and a bunch of other people for vampire and you know, I should have not let them key man me or not, let them key man chat or something, so that one of us could have, like, come over and helped you guys ride on Temple. We really needed the writing support and I remember correctly, didn't They bulked for a while because they wanted to key man me and I was like I'm already key man somewhere else. I legally can't — came in and I was worried they were gonna walk. But I think then they're, like: well, we they. Because of that, they came at a bunch of other people and it I think I had maybe three people from the Arcanum team. You got all the rest, I got three and I had to actually hire a whole new group work on. I think I got Steve Murray and um, Mike McCarthy, yes, everybody else, yeah, um, um, yeah and it, um.

It was just tough. We were um. You know, Jason was awesome on that game. He was the creative director. He really was responsible for making the um it feel like a vampire game. He like did all the research. Um, I remember playing. I went and played D with you guys when you were playing d, with your team because I was really convinced we were all moving over to that and Jason was still like working away trying to figure out how to.

How to make the, systems work on vampire and all that. And he, you know he worked with Rick Schaefer on the music for vampire, so really was a labor of love for him. I mean, I was fired up to be doing it because I just wanted to make a game with that engine. I thought it was gonna be really great.

Um, you know, we just had, you know we were trying to make a game that was completely different from what valve was optimizing for, because they were optimizing first shooter. We're trying to make an open world as much as you could in those days, open world RPG — and the engine just didn't want to do that and they were developing it. You know, in their valve they could do whatever they wanted, they would like. I think they went through I don't know how many AI programmers. So we kept.

Every time they did that, all of our AI got trashed. Anything happened to the physics? They changed all the physics, uh, yeah, engine, and suddenly a lot of our stuff didn't work, you know. So I'd get calls from Activision, on Sunday nights where they would be all upset and, yeah, I always thought that was unfair because they knew, they knew they should have been yelling at valve but they couldn't, so they yelled at you. I yeah, I don't know. I mean I've done. Sure, they were getting pressure too. The people who are yelling at me.

I'm sure it wasn't like they. I'm sure they weren't ecstatic about having to call me and yell at me. They were probably being told to do it, but it was just tough. I mean, I was the game director on that. I was, so I was literally the one just dealing with all of that. And that was because Jason started out being the game director, um, and I took it over because he was just having a problem like dealing with them. So I was like, okay, I'll deal with that, I'll deal with all the problems. Um, you know, I did, I I kind of do what I did now. I kind of did what I'm doing now in a lot of ways in terms of like overseeing the writing, editing a lot of the writing, giving a lot of feedback on the writing. Me and Chad and Jason came up with the main story for it and that's a funny story actually. So we came up with a story for it.

Um, white wolf liked the story, but they're like: you can't use Kane in the story, not you, the original vampire, you can't use Kane. Uh, how do you know? They're not the same thing, I know. So we rewrote the story and we wrote a story that I thought was still pretty good, but you know, there was something missing. There was something in the first story that that I really liked, that this, was lacking, and so we wrote that story and we started working on it, and then, a couple months later — I think it was a couple months later — they came back to us and they're like: oh, we're doing the whole gehenna thing. We're basically rebooting our you can do whatever you want. And we're like, oh, so then we kind of merged the two different stories together and we kind of came up with a hybrid between them, which I think was better than either one. Um, so that's what we built, there was a — you know you asked me about cut content. We had the multiplayer. Stuff. Um, there was a lot of Bradberry building. The Bradbury Building it was just, it was just really really tough development, I mean, because it was really hard for us to use the engine. It was hard for us to do what we were trying to do in the engine.

Um, I did, you know, like I said, I did, I helped, I I kind of or oversaw the writing. I did some writing, not too much on that, but I oversaw and edited a lot of it I made sure everything was working together. Um, I did, I did concept art, I did paintings and I remember I thought I was going to teach, I thought I was going to be involved more, because after Temple went out and we did the, patches, that, and then Atari finally said no more patches, I mean we literally couldn't, weren't allowed to do.

Another patch. I thought, great, I could vote, and also my kidney stone probably, popped out of for four months. Yeah, um, I was like, great, I can devote myself full time. And that's when Sharon said — because I think they, Sharon and Jason, had their third child and she basically said I need to step away. And so I had to take over HR and the accounting doing the books. I remember she, I remember her walking me through: here's how QuickBooks work. I was like I had one high school accounting class so I started doing that and that took up time I would have spent on vampire. So I kind of felt bad, but I'm like there's a business being run underneath all this and I could tell you were under a lot of pressure and there was literally nothing anyone could do to the floor, yeah it was tough. Um, you know, I put on a lot of weight. I was really depressed.

Um, you know, finally we hired our own AI programmer because we just couldn't. We had to show some progress, so had to, we had to show some progress. So, in effect, we took the half-life engine and finished our version of it, which, of course, was never going to be anywhere near as good as half-lives. Yeah, the thing that frustrated me the most was the version that shipped had everybody sliding around which literally didn't exist on the, billed the day before or the build the day after, but they just went. We called them up and said, hey, we've got the new build to send you and like no, don't bother, we already sent it to the duplicator.

And I was like what is the opening cinematic is? I might have lost. My mind with them on the phone at that point when I found out they were doing that that was not something that I was really happy about, so that may be very well why we never got another chance to do a game for Activision, because I lost it I I could not believe that that was happening. But you know, I understand. You know the realities of making games. You know they have to show a profit. They have to get this stuff out. They have to. You know they sent a producer down to help us finish it. You know David mullets — he helped us get it out the door. I you know, also, I thought the team came through some really amazing stuff. Yeah, Carrillo and some of the other guys just did. They were doing really cool work.

I remember I'd be there tonight, um and the way I would. Contribute is I'd, well, I did boss AIS, but, as I remember, I did manbat, because it wasn't Batman, he was man-backed, that's right. Um, but I was also a copyrighted character from DC Comics. Okay, it was neither the sheriff looking like a vet, but I would play the game and there was such cool stuff in it I still remember. I remember playing the Ocean House, yeah, and Jason had locked himself in his office for three days, didn't talk to me. He unplugged his phone and then he came out with this gem, this, like crystallization of this is a perfect way, a vampire level. So both Brian Minnesota, who was, did a lot of writing on the game — he did a great job as well — and Chad had worked on that and they'd done a lot of work on it. So it wasn't like he was starting from scratch, but there was something missing. That just wasn't kind of selling the whole thing. And Jason — you know, being the scripting and Technical Wizard and design genius that he is like — took that and really made it work and he just needed time. That's probably he was like I need space and time to do this.

And that reminds me there was one question everybody wanted to know what, because people love the malkavians they loved whose idea was it to give them okavian's unique dialogue, like the dumb dialogue we had in arcanuman Fallout? I don't know if Jason came up with that or Chad came up with it or I came up with it was kind of like a discuss, one of those discussions where we kind of came up with it. I'm pretty sure the end version of it I think a lot of it had to do with Jason, because Jason knew that the lore inside and out, so once we decided we were going a different direction with it or doing something weird with it, kind of like our dumb dialogue — um, I believe he was the one who came up with the fact that you could kind of hear things, you know, which led to the talking to the stop sign or talking to the television set.

Um, but I don't remember. I think it was a combination of Brian and Chad who came up with the way they spoke, which was really, I thought, really interesting. What I love it, some distinctive way of speaking. But the mountcavians, I mean, when you were brought into that dialogue with the stop sign, that was shocking. When you went back to your house and your news, your TV was on and the newscaster was saying about there was an explosion at a warehouse.

And then he stops and he looks at you and he goes. I know you did that, I know you were involved and you're like what's happening? Because it was so. It was it's not fourth wall breaking because the Wall's still inside the game, but it was very. It made you realize this character I'm playing crazy, yeah, and I can't control it. So it was tough. I mean, we'd been working on that four years. Was it fully four years? I think it's three and a half, I think I can't, you know the time. Just as crazy, because I can't believe.

I think that's a long time, but I think most RPGs take about three or four years to make. That's a long time. You guys spent too much time on that thing. I think the way Jason put it is: we put, we, don't. When you talk.

About vampire, you don't talk about how much time we crunched. We can only talk about how much time we did in crunch because it was such a small amount. It was about five or six years of development crunched into a three and a half year sack.

Yeah, so you know, we shipped it and I was very unhappy because I knew what shape it was in. I didn't, wasn't happy about it. Um, you know there were big chunks of the game I felt just didn't, really work, um, you know people were, it was buggy, you know it was unfinished.

People obviously were railing against that for good reason, um. So you know we tried a bunch of things. We tried to do. We're going to try to do an MMO at some point. We were going to try to do. We did make a demo. We had to do. We did two different rounds of layoffs. The first round of layoffs, um, which is horrible, um. And then so the — the small group of people we had left — we took the half-life engine and that werewolf model we had made for the observatory and we made a werewolf demo like we were playing, based on the white wolf werewolf license. That didn't go anywhere.

Um, we did that post-apocalyptic demo thing. That didn't really go anywhere, um, and to be perfectly honest, you know, looking back on it, if we had gotten another contract and continued on, I probably would have died of a heart attack or stroke or something. I was just so out of it and so depressed. I know now we joke about it, but every single game Troika released was it wasn't even a beta, it was an outfit, it was a game, basically, that we had.

Gotten to Alpha stage, which means everything works, you can play through it, all. And this is the time we're supposed to go into bug fixing and balance. And instead that was the time all three of those games were just shipped because you've had enough time to hand.

On a happier note, so I, I was like I think this was actually when we were making The Outer Worlds. I had never played it. After it shipped, I didn't want to look at it I, you know I trigger things.

To me. It was just a very, very bad time in my life, um. I was playing. I was watching somebody do a Let's Play because I'm like I should go back and look at it I don't think I can play it, but maybe I'll find somebody so I could just kind of skip through it and watch. Some of the highlights, so I want to watch somebody do, let's play.

And he was walking through — I think it was the place, the, uh, the apartment building where you had a room, um, I don't remember what it was, it doesn't really matter. But he's walking through the hallway or walking through the, foyer, the, downstairs, before you go up the stairs, and I'm just looking at it and I'm like thinking to myself: this is this looks so bad.

It's just like there's nothing in here. The textures are, oh God. I can't believe we shipped this game. I was just, I was like getting really, really bummed out and then, right at that moment, this guy goes.

I just love this game so much. This game is the best game. I just love this game.

He started talking about all the great things about it. He was talking about how much he loved it, how many times he played it was very cathartic at the very moment where I was just like I can't believe we shipped This guy was talking about how much fun he had with it and how many times he played it, you know, and the fact that people are still patching it. Um, I don't, there's something about you know I I want to include Chad in this too, because, you know, after I came, he was definitely a part of it where, when we got together and we made stuff, there was a spark There was this weird chemist Alchemy of like our enthusiasm and our personalities and wanting to make this stuff um, and wanting to make it really deep and really good, um, that, I think, really comes across to people, even when we failed. I feel like the passion. Comes through.

I think you're right and also I find it — I I made a video about Nuance. I find it interesting that people will argue taste. To me it's like, you know what I feel about white chocolate.

I'm not very reasoned about it, Tim. I'm not going to make a debate about people who eat white chocolate or big dumb idiots, but in fact there's part of me that's like I'm glad they're out there eating it all up to get it out of my face. But people have to understand taste is taste.

There's a subjectivity to this and I think our games may have had bugs. They may have had bugs. The couple a have may have had bugs, the couple a couple. Here and there was a. I think you can tell that turkey games were tricky games. They had a style, they had a. A way they were crafted that, I think, transcends bugs and time, and engines, and it's just. There's something there and I have no idea even how I would go about teaching someone to do it.

Yet we hired people who are new to the industry or new to making RPGs and they — I don't know if it was osmosis or what — they gained that, that craftsmanship skill, and then they did stuff that we hadn't planned on, we weren't expecting, and it was just, it was really cool. And that's when I thought I remember setting down Troika, thinking this is the end of an era. I didn't think that was Fallout, but I did think when Troika shut down, I'm like this was a special time and this will never repeat, and I did think that I was. I mean it was nice not to have all that intense pressure and it took months to actually get it shut down, because you can start a company by signing a piece of paper, but shutting it down took months. Well, but it was still something amazing. I, I think, you know, we, obviously grew a lot during that time and we learned a lot.

What's that? Well, I put on a little weight too would be. Um, you know, like I said earlier, we started out like giving it.

We didn't. We're not going to have any producers, not gonna have any managers. We're, you know, we're going to pay everything better, the same amount of money. And we were shocked that there were some people who we felt that were our level in terms of talent, who wanted to be told what to do. We're like: how do you want to be told what to do? Don't you want to just do your own thing?

There's some certain people who work really good. Giving them a list of tasks and they'll just, you know, they'll do great at it. Um, so after that, you know, when we were doing, uh, vampire and Temple, we went to a tiered system. We had some producer, we had some. You know, we did a lot more management stuff and it's like it was necessary to do. When you start making bigger games, you have to do that stuff. So I understand a lot more about how companies end up the way they do, why things happen the way they do. Um, you know, obviously we don't always like it, um, but there's, you know, once you're dealing with realities, and if and if we had kept going, I think it really could have ended up with not only, let's say, I survived, we could have become, in, you know, fairly detached from people, because it's like, at a certain point, it's like you're running this company and people are working for you, which we always try to get a get away from. And the one thing that that I realized years later when talking to people who worked there, you know, we left interplay and our goal was to recreate what we thought interplay was losing. We thought we were going to make, you know, interplay our, at least the RPG part of interplay, um, you know, part two, um, because we thought they were kind of moving away from some of that stuff or they weren't going to last too long, which of course we were wrong about, um, but we were, you know, we wanted to do this thing that had that Vibe, and I didn't realize, I don't think any of us realized, if we're running the company, we don't get to partake in that.

Because everybody I've talked to who worked there — I shouldn't say everybody, but most of the people I've talked to who worked there, I think actually everybody. Now that I think about it, I'm sure there's people who have a difference of different opinion, but I don't know that. I've talked to them about it. Everybody literally I've talked to about it tells me that was their best gaming or game job that they ever had. They loved it there, they loved the vibe, they loved it. And that's when I really realized it's just like it was great. But we had all that extra pressure on us. We were running the company so we couldn't really partake in that great Vibe we had created.

I've had people tell me the same thing, that that was people who've had 20 or 30 years in the industry and they're like that was my favorite part. And I mean I'm proud of that. I I wish it could have gone on longer, but it reminds me of that line from Blade Runner where the replicate wants more life and I think the glass guy, like you burn so very brightly, Roy, you don't. And then someone came and crushed his eyes, just like happened to us.

Yeah, I was pretty much done at. Yeah, I was, I was pretty much done at that point. I don't know that I could have continued, even if we had gotten a contract. It was rough, but it's nice to look back on. I mean I don't regret running Troika. I still I that we should have run a company, you know It's weird because as much as I wish that we could have worked on Fallout 2 — because I would have really loved to have made that game — I have zero. Regrets that we went and did Troika. I think that that was.

There'd be no Arcanum if we had done volunteers. No, I, I think it was just something we had to do at the time. You know, and it's funny how we ended up. You know, there was a lot of people there who are always at interplay, who were always talking about running their own companies, leaving and making tons of money, and we were the ones like, why would you want to do that? And then we end up being the ones who actually leave and insert our own company.

Yeah, it was a. It was a wild ride that I'm not even sure we could do today. People were like: do it again. They were like, no, no, yeah, but so, yeah, it was good times. Well, thank you. Thank you for you're welcome talking about all this again. And now that we've talked about all this, I will never, ever talk to you again.

Can I have that in writing? I need it notarized. No, this was great. I'm sure you know if people have questions about any of this stuff, you know I'm not going to turn this into a interview Channel, but I have asked some other people if they're interested in coming on, because this was fun and also I love that, like I may have the dates and the events all in my notes, but there's always different perspectives people have, yeah, and different things they remember, and it's just. I like the fact that, just by the fact that you and I have talked about it, these events are a little more probably accurate in what we've talked about, because, oh yeah, they're things you brought up. I'm like, oh yeah, I remember that happened. I. Would never remember that.

I'm just happy that the rest of the world now gets Tim's story time that me and Jason always would make jokes about. Yeah, well, I mean it's great because you know, these are these, These are the stories we've been talking about for 25 years now. Yeah, it's funny, when I taught at UCI, one of the students there said: it's like Tim's Story Hour. Twice a week. I am trying to teach, I'm trying to educate, but, um, yeah, that didn't happen.

All right, man, all right, thanks, Leonard. Well, thanks for having me. We'll talk to you later.
