+++
title = "Making A YouTube Channel, Part 2"
date = "2023-10-15"
id = "nT_S9Qv7n_Y"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life", "YouTube"]
summary = "I talk about what it's been like making this channel and posting daily videos for the past six months. This is a continuation of part 1, here:"
references = ["_UVNDsvtNRk"]
+++

Hi everyone, it's me, Tim, and this is part two of making a YouTube channel.

So I did part one back in August, I think it was. I'll put a link below, and when this video comes out it will have been 6 months since I started doing this. There's over 180 videos on this channel now because I've done one a day. And I say when this comes out it's because when I was doing the videos where every day I wore a different shirt out of my boxed collection of video game shirts, some of those shirts were kind of stinky, so I'd film a video and then I'd switch to another like one of my shirts that I'd washed, and sometimes that day I'd film another video. And that way I got about two weeks ahead, which really helped, because I took a week-long trip during the period of making this Channel and no one noticed, because there was no, No Interruption of videos, because I had that buffer.

But it has led to some funny discussions. Where I'll post a video and a friend of mine will call me and go — we were just talking about that a couple days ago and I'm like, yeah, I brought it up because I made a video about it two weeks ago. Sometimes it's a coincidence too: I will literally make a video and because there's a delay of it coming out, after I make it I'll see a topic come up in the news or among colleagues or with a friend of mine, and then boom, um, the video I made before I ever saw any of that comes out.

But anyway, that's not what I wanted to talk about. What has been interesting about making this channel, now that I'm a few more months past the last time I made a video, I'm going to talk first about logistics. I I touched upon this a little bit in the other video — Windows, really. Seems to fight me on making videos. I have switched video Hardware. I have switched microphone Hardware multiple times. I've had to deal with video being blurry or too dark or too bright. I finally settled on a Sony zv1.

I mean well, my husband got it to me for a gift because it disconnects me from the computer. I don't have to worry about the computer and windows being strange, especially the out of sync stuff that happened frequently was just Windows going. Yeah, the video and sound are coming from the same device, but I've decided to desynchronize them, um, the sound spikiness came and went. I tried using a lav mic, and it with a little muty. I finally discovered that I can hook my Yeti directly into the zv1 and that solved all my sound issues, especially because now everything is being done with one device that isn't connected anything and only has this one purpose: um.

Part of the problem I think I was having this trouble with Windows is because my computer is about 7 — almost 8 — years old now and some of its usb3 ports are not USB 3. I found this out when I got my VR helmet last year, my Oculus or meta Quest 2. I plugged it into a 3.0 port and it did not recognize it. Nothing popped up. I switched to a different 3.0 port and boom, there it was. I think this is because my machine is from 2016 and USB 3.2 specification was not released until 2017. So I think I have some 3.0 devices that need something that's in the 3.2 spec, but they don't say that.

I mean most people, don't? You know this is not something you can put on the box.

Requires 3.2 um, and since my machine came out before it was finally ratified, I think they had to guess what some of the things were going to be and they may have guessed wrong and so some of my devices that need 3.0 don't get it I also know um. USB plugs are colorcoded. Uh, 3.0 are blue but 3.2 are teal and as a color blind person, I've have not seen the difference between blue and Teo in decades. So there's that I also had to learn software video editing. This is rough for me.

I've never done video editing. I try not to edit my stuff at all. In fact, most of my videos I do in one take and I just edit the beginning and end where you see me reach in and turn on and off the camera.

Um, I've also had issues with the dog. We have a yellow lab. I think she's shown up, I know. You've heard her, when I start talking or my husband starts talking, she runs to where we are because she has fomo. She has fear of missing out. She wants: is someone here? Are you guys talking about going out? Are you talking about food?

I need to get in on this. So once I started filming these, she would then run in and look around and knock my arm and sometimes crawl under the desk and start snoring, and then the mic would pick that up and I was like: oh, so now I have to shut the door. Shutting the door causes a little more echo, which I finally solved because the Ed can be directed to only pull sound from the front and ignore the back. So finally got through all that, but let's just say that logistically there was a lot of stuff I had to do that I was unprepared for. I never had to do as just making video games.

The other interesting thing is I've been contacted by a lot of old friends. I left social media in 2016 after getting a death threat for mentioning I got married. There were some people who, when they saw that I married a guy, freaked out and were saying, oh my God, I liked his old games. What does that say about me? Nothing, it means you liked Fallout, but no, I actually got death threats.

Um, Facebook kind of ignored them and I finally just left all of social media. I was done, but what was cool about making this channel is friends of mine have contacted me that I went to school with. In fact, I had dinner a couple weeks ago with a woman I knew in graduate school, my next door neighbor, who was in some of my ad and stories I have. Been contacted by people from past jobs I worked at some of them, going: hey, now what I heard is this, and we've had really good discussions about things, where I Iz my notes, since they were written in a passive tense, like I was told X. Sometimes it's like, oh okay, I heard that what I heard was true, but it was from a different person who told me some people have contacted me from old jobs, going, hey, I don't think I got the right credit and I'm like: please see my video on credits.

It's just, it's a nightmare to give everybody the credits they want. Um, and, yes, we have tried one in Arcanum, just saying this game was made by these people and we didn't even say what it was what they did, but online websites cannot handle that. So we all ended up getting random credit assignments and I've also gotten contacted by people who want to offer me jobs or, in one case, feces, wanting to say, hey, if we gave you some money, would you make another game. And I'm like. I specifically said that's not what I wanted. So it's interesting: some of the people who contact me wanted to drag up old beefs. You know, one person said, hey, you didn't create that. I did, and literally it turned out. This is what happened.

Someone said to me one time: hey, we should do feature X and I replied: we are about a year later. He said he wanted credit for it. He goes. I saw you in the hallway and I told you about feature X and I said: yeah, and my reply was: it's already in the game, we already have it speced, we're putting it in. He goes: no, that idea came from me and I'm like that Confluence page you can go look up the date. We already had that idea, so you know, luckily I was saved by something as objective as a Confluence dat. But that's happened in the past where people assumed because they thought of something that no one else had thought of it and they should get the credit for it. And I even talked about how in Fallout the idea for companions came well before the people actually got companions in the game. So it's just hard to say who should get credited and some people go credit everybody. I'm like okay, but I'm not going to credit somebody who had an idea that someone else already had and has done so. There has to be a line on somewhere. This is an issue.

I've also got contacted by a few people who said you got me fired, to which all I could say: was, if I fired you myself, I was doing it either because, yeah, you deserved it, you know you weren't getting work done, or in one case, they violated some company rule multiple times and my hands were tied. I was like I got to let you go. But there were some people who got fired, who blamed me and I had nothing to do with them being fired, and all I can say is, if I wanted you fired, I would have fired you. But if you think I got you fired, let me just tell you there were a lot of decisions that go into firing someone, and it's never done lightly, so that, um, I've had some people contact me and go. That's a crazy amount of work you do. I can't believe you do a video every day, aren't you trying to retire? And I'm like, well, first of all, this level of work to do this kind of channel is nothing compared to the amount of work you have to do to get a video game out. Um, and compared to my old work habits where I'd work six or seven days a week, this is literally. I mean, I think about what I want to talk about, kind of organize my thoughts, talk for 15 minutes, throw it up on the web. Um, I, like I said, I don't do much editing. I have recently tried to put photos and videos into some of my V, some of my videos, because I want to show the people or I want to show the event, like when I'm talking about the launch parties I went to, but I usually don't do that.

Um, also, doing something daily is not that hard because a I've got a ton of topics working in an industry for 42 years, you got a lot of topics to talk about. There's a lot of ground to cover. But also you guys give really good questions. Some people ask me questions and I'm like I never thought to talk about that. I'm going to talk about that, so as long as that keeps going, I'll keep doing this.

Yes, it's, been 6 months. At some point in the future I will probably switch to not doing it daily, maybe doing it three times a week or something, but I'll give you a heads up if I do that. And going on to comments, it's it, I've had really good comments. I mean really good questions that led me to doing videos, some really good comments that I responded to directly. Then there are comments, well, there are some comments I ignore.

People just seem to want to go out of their way, to be unkind. And I get It's the internet. This is not my first time on the internet. I was on the internet when it was called the arpanet — but it's just weird how many people I — I don't know if it makes them happy to do that or if they're unhappy so they want other people to be unhappy. So everybody's kind of down at their level. But it's kind of sad to watch and I don't know if they have the self reflection to know that it's sad to see comments like that. But seriously, it's not helping anybody when you just want to drag things down. If you yell at me or yell at people commenting on my videos, it's not, you're not getting anywhere.

One of them that made me laugh the hardest is: I will often say something and then somebody, deliberately or unconsciously or whatever, takes the other, the opposite of. What I said and then argues it. I'll give you an example. I had a video recently where I said it's very hard to do this thing. Most games get it wrong, there was a comment that went: impossible to do this thing.

You say no, that's not what I said. That is exactly not what I said. When I said it's hard and some people, a lot of games, don't do it that implies some of the games do it, which means it's not impossible, it's just hard. And then I listened a bunch of reasons it was hard. So I don't know if that all got ignored, but sometimes it's hard to do these videos.

I enjoy doing it because I like starting the discussion. There's things that just aren't talked about enough in this industry, but I see why my colleagues don't and I've been approached by a lot of my colleagues going why are you doing this? Why are you just opening yourself up to this kind of negativity? And I always have the same answer.

If just one person on this channel picks up Unity or unreal or gdau and makes a game or is wavering on deciding whether or not to join the game industry and does, that's awesome because, as I am semi-retired and eventually enter reti retirement, I'm playing a lot more games, which means I need better games. You know, Uncle Tim wants you to make a good game for me. So now that I've explained through lots of videos what I like and what I don't like, maybe I'll get some better games out of it I mean, that's a perfectly selfish reason to do this. But yes, I'm also happy when people say, hey, I think I'm going to go in the game industry because of this. That's cool too, and I like that. But I do understand why — why you don't see more videos like this from my industry colleagues.

Some of you are unkind. Some of you just seem to want to argue just for the sake of arguing. I've tried to show them though, the really cool discussions that some of you have had. I forward them sometimes to work colleagues going: look at this. You know this is an interesting discussion of class and skill-based games. We should pay more attention to these things, so I like that. I can just provide a space which those discussions happen and maybe some games will get better because of it, maybe not, but I'm an idealist. Anyway, that was my part. Two of things I'm learning: making a YouTube channel.
