+++
title = "Horror In Non-Horror Games"
date = "2024-09-17"
id = "NuD8OxQtrDk"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about horror and non horror games."
references = ["qQ7PpOztJyA", "K8nYj-wdaHE"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about horror and non horror games.

I want to answer a question from decode 666, who asked horror and non-horror video games — how to approach it properly, that one Mission which still ST, which still sends chills down your spine, for example, the Ocean House Hotel in vampire, the Masquerade bloodlines, or the atmosphere of Fallout 1 and two, like the at Ambience, music level, design and art, robbing the cradle in Thief, deadly Shadows, the Dunwich building in Fallout 3, ravenol and halflife 2. Those are a lot of good examples and I think I've played them all or been there when they were made. So I'm going to answer decode 666's question, but first I want to point out decode 66 is the person who did the, wood art behind me, the one I did the video on. I'll link it below, so so, hey, anyway, um, a lot of what you mentioned in your question, even if it was on games I worked on, I didn't. Make it, so I've told this story many times, but Jason Anderson did the Ocean House level in Bloodlines.

Also, many of the horror elements you see in Fallout, they weren't my idea, so especially like the master, um, the, psychic stuff going on, that those weren't, those didn't come from me, but I think I can address it, um, because I was there when they were made. I understand why they were made and I think I can answer your basic question is: what can I do to add horror elements into a game I'm making, even if the game itself isn't a horror game? So you could say vampire the Bloodlines is a horror game, but it really isn't. Um, certainly Fallout wasn't made to be a horror game, so let's talk about that. Probably one of the most basic ways you can add horror is just body horror. You know the West Craven.

Oh my God, there's tentacles coming out of that or there's a blob, or why does that thing have so many eyes? This, the reason this works is it gets us at an instinctual level. For most people they can't help feeling a little repulsed and it heightens that sense of horror. This is why when you — I've talked in the past about um — when you see faces that are close to but not quite human, it has that uncanny valley where you're close but you're not quite, and therefore people fre repulsed. It's kind of a similar thing. It's a instinctual thing that we feel and because it's instinctual, players can't logic it away. So for a lot of people they will feel horror, even if they don't want to, even if they're like, haha, oh, this, that's a stupid monster or whatever some level.

They're going, so it's a good. Way of doing it. There's also ways of doing it where you can show how things that you have been taught in the game, so you learn things, and it leads to a horror, it leads to a conclusion which is horrifying. Now it could be very mundane things. So as you're going along, you're just learning very mundane things.

It's like, well, yeah, okay, that's the thing. And then it all comes together and you're like, oh no, it also might be a mystery. You're wondering how something works, or who somebody is, or why something is happening, and you dig, and then when you, dig and you dig, and then when you find out, you're like, oh no. So let me give a spoiler. Don't watch this if you want to read the Revelation space books by Alistair Reynolds. So quit now, because I'm about to give a big spoiler in that.

Universe there are these. You can't go FTL, well, you can, but let's just say most, people can't. So ships are called light Huggers, where they go right up to, but they don't quite pass a speed of light and of course normally that takes. The reason we can't do is it that take an awful lot of fuel you keep need to keep on board and that fuel has mass, and just to accelerate to use that fuel, you're going to have to push all the other fuel as you go along. So there was a group called The conjoiners Who basically had cybernetically modified their brain cases and they came up with something called a conjoiner drive and nobody knew how they worked. But here was what people did know they didn't take any fuel. When you turn them on, they just, you know, emitted thrust and that pushed your ship forward. They.

Always came in pairs and they had to be installed in pairs and those pairs had to be kept a certain distance apart. No closer, no farther, or certainly no farther. Maybe they could get closer, but certainly no farther, or they would explode. Worse, if you tried to open them up to see what was inside, they would explode.

If, as you read the books, people are trying to figure out how these work and one of the things you discover is the reason they don't need fuel is the ship itself contains a wormhole, not just through space but Al also Through Time back to the Big Bang. So it's literally shooting out super energetic plasma from the beginning of the explosion of the universe. So it never needs to refuel because once that Wormhole connection is made, it shoots just all that horrible High Press plasma out. You know it doesn't need fuel, and it is. You do find out too that it's been um booby trapped to explode if you try to Tinker with it, which you think explains the distance thing, but it turns out the Wormhole. Then there has to be one in each. It is so hard to maintain the Wormhole connection and keep the drives balanced that the conjoiners actually disembody one of their own and put their brain in one of the drives and that brain, that disembodied brain, controls both drives. And the reason: if you separate them too far, the drives have to be balanced in such a like — I think it's more than nanc, it might be aloc — just such a tiny window of error that if you get them too far apart, the brain which is just located in one of them can't keep the other one synced and they explode when you.

Find that out, that all these ships flying around using these conjoiner drives and each one of them is a disembodied conjoiner brain — Horror. By the way, that's not even the least Horror in that book, so it's sci-fi, but it's certainly got horror elements. Back to games, here are some things you can do in games that will introduce horror elements: trapping the player.

Now, in general, I'm against this. I don't like it, when you like, you throw the player into something and they can't get out of it. But if the player willingly or knowingly does something like jumps down in a pit, knowing they're going to have to figure a way out, or goes into a building and they're like: don't go in there, people don't come back, and you go in and the door locks behind you. This idea of just being trapped also introduces an instinctual horrific response in players. Another way is to make them feel threatened and they don't exactly know how to counter it. This is, this happened in the Ocean House level, where you're walking around and things are being thrown and if one of them hits you it does a little bit of damage.

You have nothing, you don't. You don't know how to deal with that. You have nothing in Your Arsenal on. How do I defend myself against random objects being thrown at me? So when the player's threatened but doesn't have a skill or item or something to deal with it — some ability that engenders this feeling of horror. Even more so is if you threaten the player and they do have a standard way of dealing with it that doesn't work for this threat. So let's say you're playing a fantasy game and you're playing a wizard and you suddenly run into a magic, resist, resistent Monster, Fear, horror. Let's say you're a fire Mage and you run into a fireproof like a fire. Elemental Fire doesn't work on it. Yikes, that engenders fear. Fear can lead to horror if it gets to a really bad, if you stretch the situation out and stretch the threat out.

There was one example, um, of something that happened to me in Fallout 4 where I like using Vats, I like using C shot. I loved it in the original fallouts. I loved what it turned into in the later fallouts. But there was one very rare type — I think it was a Raider who had such good Cham chameleon armor — it might have even been a deathclaw that could do this too — that you couldn't do Vats on them. They were effectively invisible. You would see a shimmer and you could shoot at that Shimmer and they would take damage.

But if you activated V it could not lock on to them. It would lock on to any other enemy in the in the scene, but not them. The first time that happens, fear because you're like, oh, I always use Vats and now I can't use it was terrifying and you eventually, when you fight enough of them, you learn if you shoot them enough, it will disrupt the chameleon field and then you can use Vats on them. But you do have to shoot them a little bit and I like that because it's. It mixed things up, it made it, got me out of my comfort zone. Similarly, something you could do is: um, and I think we talked about this in the The Outer Worlds and we didn't do it because we had the bullet time, we had everything slowed down. I wanted to suggest that there could be an enemy that wasn't affected by it.

So everybody else slows down, but they're like, I'm still coming for you and they move just as quickly, or almost just as quickly. And how terrifying would that be for the player who's like: uhoh, things are going badly, you know, and they go to slow everything down, and that one enemy doesn't slow down. This causes just a visceral fear, which I think translates great into horror, especially if you throw the other things. If this is, you know, a body, this is a tentacle monster, you've never seen this thing before, or you're trapped somewhere with it. You combine these elements, it gets really bad. So the general principle here — let me sum it all up for you — is: break a rule, occasionally trap a player, um, give them a mystery that leads to a conclusion they weren't expecting, threaten them without a way to counter it. And this will engender fear and horror.

You can even, if you want, explain later why that rule gets broken for this particular enemy. But the point is, if you occasionally break a rule and justify later, this will help you introduce that fear element, this horror element, into your game: so decode 666. I hope that answers your question.
