+++
title = "Picking Your Best Class in AD&D"
date = "2023-08-27"
id = "ob-NNCpwapI"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Dungeons & Dragons", "Character Systems"]
summary = "I talk about how to pick the best class in Advanced Dungeons & Dragons, based on a rejected article I wrote for The Dragon magazine in the 1980s."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about picking your best class in a, d and d.

Why? Because I found This is something I sent to Dragon publishing. Oh, it's not gonna work. Um in 1980, Something the postmark has been worn off for a submission to be published in the dragon magazine, although I think they dropped the by then used to be the dragon and then it just became dragon. But I submitted this to Roger Moore who was the editor, saying: hey, you wrote something like this, but since then Unearthed arcan has come out.

I've done a much more lower resolution [Music]. [Music] ]: um or higher resolution graph of the issue.

Basically, it talks about picking a character class in ad based on how quickly you get the spell levels and what your hit points would be and just how fast you'd rise in level effectively it can. It compares the classes with their XP and compare, compares the XP they get to the level they are and also the hit points they have. So I'll read you the beginning of it and I'll show you some graphs and I'll tell you what conclusions I drew in this masterpiece of an article. So it's called picking your best class and Analysis of a d character classes. The ad game system provides a large variety of character classes and races with which to Adventure. The sheer number of combinations possible often confuses the beginning player who Wonder — quote - just what is the best character to take, unquote. The veteran gamer knows that the word best here is a relative term and that the best class depends both on the player's tastes and the dungeon Masters campaign.

The purpose of this article is to reveal some statistical quirks in the ad system so that the these anomalies can be exploited by players in their DMS milieu. Okay, wow, was I just a teenager full of French words and the desire to exploit ad anyway, um. I go on to talk about the different classes and how I examined the classes by based on their XP, by both their level and their hit points. I did add this note. I said — please note the lack of inclusion — that The Bard class is not an oversight. Bards are difficult to analyze due to their tripartite level advancement: Fighters, thieves and then bards. Besides, they're an optional class which many DMS do not allow anyway.

However, if your DM allowed with bards, take one in all caps, they rise in levels better than thieves. In the long run. They have the best overall hit point average of any class. They fight well because of their fighter class, they can use spells and they have thieving abilities.

Basically, you will be your DM's worst nightmare. So I will figure out how to show these figures later when I edit this. But let me talk about level advancement. Figures one and two show The Continuous level curves for level advancement for all classes, including the new Cavalier, Barbarian and Thief acrobat classes from Unearthed Arcana and the extra Druid levels that that book provided. The advancement has been separated into two graphs due to the differences between the irregular advancement at lower levels — mostly those levels under 10 — and then the steady advancement at higher levels. So if you look at figure one — and hopefully I'm displaying it here — we noticed two surprising things.

First, the thief is not the fastest rising character class based on XP between six. Between levels six and twelve, the Druid is clearly the advancement winner, beating out the thief easily and being a full four levels higher than. The Barbarian, which is the worst class for advancement. Second, the Paladin is not the slowest Rising character, contrary to popular belief.

The monk between Fifth and Ninth level and the Barbarian at all other levels is far worse. Turning our attention to figure two, which is the upper lover advancement, we see that from 12th to 14th level, the Druid goes from the best to the second worst character for level advancement. Thieves and illusionists are the fastest characters to rise over 12th level and in fact are equally good. Both need the same amount to go up one level at those upper levels. And why?

The Illusionist is always one level lower than the thief? What is the big difference between being level 29 and 30? Anyway, recommendation is based solely on your desire to be the highest level possible. The best character to take would be a thief. If stealing is in your Forte, then you have a choice.

If your DM's campaign seems to have a level maximum around 12 — so no one's ever really made it over 12th level — then take it through it. Otherwise an Illusionist is a good choice. All Illusionist characters should be human in order to have unlimited advancement. But half elves make great thieves and Druids. They have a limited advancement like humans, plus several advantageous racial abilities like introvision, resistance to sleep and charm, and bonuses to thieving abilities. And according to the racial preference table on honor, Unearthed our camera, Cana, page 12.. It seems that almost all of the races get along with half elves. I mean, I am the king of mini maxing.

So for hit point averages, as with the level advancement curves, the hit point average curves can be broken into two graphs: one for lower amounts, figure three — and the other for higher amounts — figure four. These averages are computed for the characters assuming only the average Constitution scores between 7 and 14.. This is slightly deceiving because certain fighter types, namely the Cavalier, Paladin and Barbarian, all have to have constitutions of at least 15.. Which entitles them to additional hit points at each level. However, to simplify the comparisons, only the base hit point averages are plotted. It's relatively easy to shift the curves up for each of the possible Constitution scores, but this would only result in a cluttered, hard to read graph. So, additionally, this simplification is not to matter because, as figures three and four show, the Cavalier has better hit point average than any other class, even without its Constitution bonus, and he maintains his lead until 4.5 million XPS. At 24th level, the Cavalier gets its advantage over Fighters by having a higher initial average, a d10 plus three. At level one compared to the fighters, which is eight and a half points compared to the fighters five and a half — and actually Rising level faster than Fighters at levels of 9 through 13..

The worst character for hit points is, unsurprisingly, the magic user. He has less hit points at level 32 than the Cavalier has at level nine. The Illusionist character escapes this fate barely by Rising a great deal faster than the magic user. It is also interesting to note that the monk is actually worse than the magic user at level seven through nine because of its poor advancement.

So a recommendation based purely on hit points: a player should take a Cavalier. Not only we have the best hit points, but your level and therefore your two hit scores and saving throws will be comfortable to all the other fighter types and also the character class that receives numerable. This. Character classroom receives numerable extra abilities such as weapon Choice, horsemanship and saving throw bonuses. So why would you ever settle for being a fighter?

The perceptive reader May notice that the curve for barbarians is especially deceptive because they gain plus two hit points for every point above 14, which would result in extra eight points per level for a barbarian with an 18 Constitution. This does make the Barbarian better than the Cavalier, even one with an 18 Constitution — at low levels. But since the Barbarian advances so slowly at higher levels — roughly the upper teens — the Cavalier is better again. Also, Cavaliers have a special ability to raise their ability scores as they level up. So the Cavalier is much more likely to have an 18 Constitution than a barbarian. Indeed, the Barbarian rises in level so slowly that it would need those extra points just to survive. So then I go on, and say: if you're going to pick a cleric, pick a druid.

Why? Druids get cure light wounds at level two, at the second level, but they get that really quickly and cure serious wounds is fourth, for both clerics and Druids will get those Druids and Druids will get those at half the experience points. A cleric needs.

Clear. Purecritical is a higher level spell for a druid, but he actually gets it before. Cleric would get level fifth, level spells and Druids can shape change so they don't need to worry about curing themselves. For the best fighter, basically, I said go Cavalier for best spell Caster. Um, it's a difficult decision because while illusionists have better hit points and levels, magic users have a subjectively better spell list. However, I point out that even though illusionists have a rip issue for being weak, some of their spell was.

A non-arthur Canada — are so fast and so powerful and can be cast silently that they're actually really powerful and you should probably consider them over a magic user. And then for the thief assassin, Thief acrobat and monk, as Thief type classes, the thief was the hands down winner, Rising level faster and having the best overall hit point average. And since any race can be, a thief and a half off has a limited advancement and they have nothing but bonuses for thieves, they're the recommended race. And then, finally, I went into multi-class and I pointed out that Illusionist Thief Rises faster than any other, and cleric fighter magic user is a wonderful choice because despite its slug-like rise, it's got great attack spells, Great Character spells and great physical attacks and as an added bonus, you rarely see cleric fighter magic user combinations can use almost every single magic item that drops. All potions and 90 of scrolls are usable as well as every single one, except two miscellaneous items, those two being the manual stealthy pilfering and the instrument of the bards. This means that all but roughly one tenth of one percent of all magic items that drop according to the charts and the DMS guide are usable by that one class. And then, if you're going to two class, I go on to recommend things like the Druid turned Thief or a an Illusionist turned druid. Some other interesting classes turn, um uh, fighter turn magic user, because you can really up the hit points early on and then you immediately start casting spells. And then a magic user turned Illusionist, so you never know which one of his magic missiles are real and which ones are illusions.

So I gave a conclusion, which I hope, this: helps beginning and veteran players decide on classes, and, — and I hope I've Illustrated the difference — and I received a — uh, a form letter that basically said: dear author, thank you for submission, and it circled. We have no current editorial interest in this subject. But then he hand wrote — and this is from Robert Moore. Good work, though, and interestingly, this letter isn't dated either, so I don't know when I did this. My guess is 1987, plus or minus a year.

So late High School, really really early college? No, no, that would actually be definitely late college.

So I wanted to share that because I thought it was hilarious how my brain thought, even back then, when I went to go through system mechanics in games like Advanced under the dragons. Hope you liked it too.
