+++
title = "Player Agency"
date = "2024-01-01"
id = "OoJ6CDDfYiU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Player Choice"]
summary = "Hi everyone, it's me, Tim, and let's start off the new year by talking about player agency."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone, it's me, Tim, and let's start off the new year by talking about player agency.

Now, what do I mean by player agency? Is that when a game agency? Player agency is that when a game allows the player to choose what to do and then the game reacts, especially the storyline of the game. And player agency the opposite of this would be when a game has a predefined, very narrow set of things the player can do, even though it feels like he should be able to do other things, and the storyline is predictable and unchangeable. You're basically as the player, you're just. You just move along that story, you're just there for the ride.

I think to anybody who's played any of my games, you know that I'm all for as much player agency as possible. Now, player agency is not binary. You don't have a game that either has player agency or doesn't.

Usually it's a Continuum of things, and let me give you an example. Let's say you're playing a game where you run around a world doing things and you only have one weapon, the one you start with. That's very limited agency. A little more agency is you can find different weapons and you can switch between them. Now you have a player who can decide what weapon he wants to use. Maybe they're a skill skills for the different weapons. So now there's even more interesting player agency, because there's choice for what skill you want to use. Maybe the skills even unlock things you can do with those weapons and then you can choose what weapons to use. Maybe you switch weapons when you're fighting monsters because some weapons are better than others.

Even more agency, so let's say you're running around the world. Let's say you're using a sword and you're hitting things. Let's say you hit the wall. Okay, that's, you know you do that. Let's say when you hit the wall, you hear a sound based on the material of your weapon and the material of the wall. H.

That's interesting, maybe it leaves a mark, a decal. That's even more interesting. That's just additional way. The game is reacting to what you're doing in a way that you know the designer expected you to do that. Maybe you can hit some things and break it. Maybe you can break through a door that way. Maybe you can break open a chest that way.

That's even more agency because, now, even though there were skills to pick locks, the game is saying: I'll let you do this. Maybe it's not good for the weapon. Maybe weapons have damages on it and it gets damaged a lot more when you use it for things like that.

You can see even more decisions the designer made. Maybe when you break open chests, you get the things inside even more agency. Maybe sometimes breaking open the chest breaks some of the things inside even more reaction to what you're doing. Maybe creatures nearby come to investigate the noise or get mad if they see you stealing things from their chest — even more agency. Maybe the game story changes if you ever discovered to be a thief, whether it changes locally or globally. Wow, that's even more agency, so I hope I explained how a simple decision like I can hold different weapons created a whole Continuum of player agency in a game. That's what I'm talking about, this Continuum of player agency. I like pushing as far along that that continu was possible.

Now let me make something clear, though I'm not talking about restrictions caused by the game engine, like it doesn't support. Maybe it doesn't support determining sound based on material. Maybe it doesn't support different sound effects, maybe it doesn't support breaking geometry, or maybe your budget didn't support that. Maybe the engine supports it but you just didn't have the animation budget to show things breaking apart like that, or to show items in the world that maybe you can only get things out of containers because they're you know you can never show an item sitting on the ground.

I'm not talking about those kind of things. I'm by player agency. I'm talking about deliberate decisions made by The Game's designer to allow certain things to happen or to restrict them from happening. And that's what I'm talking about, because those deliberate decisions are what interests me, and when I'm playing a game, that's what I look for. Many people have asked what, how I play a game. I look for those deliberate design decisions because I call that the hand of the designer I want to know what here she is telling me. I want you to do this, but I don't want you to do This happens a lot in interfaces, if you ever use an interface and you pick up stuff and things go into different categories, that right there is a designer saying, hey, these things are used for different purposes. Let me divide those up into categories for you, and each category has a different purpose.

If when you go to a vendor, they automatically they have the button or something you can say to the vendor to sell all your junk items or whatever, obviously that's what they thought you would do. If they didn't think you would do that, they wouldn't have spent the extra time to put that in the interface. And then sometimes, when those things are missing, like you can't walk up to a vendor and say: sell everything from this.

Category, that's the designer saying: I don't think you should ever want to do that. So once I I call that the hand of the, designer. It's the obvious decisions that the designer made in the game and he's he or she is telling you about those decisions through that design. So so let's talk about things that I like to see, elements of a game that I consider to increase player agency at least, and these are things I like to put in mind. The first thing is that there are lots of different character builds you can make.

I've stated that if you provide me a character, especially an already named character, I'm far less interested in your game. I want the game to be able to let me make as many different characters as possible in that character creator, and then I want the game to react to what I made. And I know people go, well, this leads a lot of people to Mini Max and stuff like that. I'm fine with that, if you want to make someone who's super, super strong and clumsy and stupid and, you know, has low health or whatever, what an interesting character. I want to see how long that character can survive.

Related to that is: I love games that have lots of systemic options, in other words, ways to proceed through quests or the storyline that are not scripted, that are emergent behaviors and emergent reactions of the game based on code. In Fallout, it was things like you when you pickpocketed things off players. It turns out because we reused the vendor interface, you could also place things in them. I noticed that I was like I don't know why anybody want to do that.

Well, I told you, QA found something fun to do, which is taking grenades, pulling the pins and putting it in someone else's inventory. I love that, not because I approve of the action, but because I love the fact that the systems that were designed allow the player to interact with the world in a way I never anticipated. Basically, it's additional player agency and since I didn't plan for it's surprise player agency and I love it. Things like dialogue choices: if you've ever played a game and you want to be able to say something and they don't give you anything near that in the responses. I don't like that, if I want to tell someone you're being a jerk or I'm not going to pay for this, I don't know where you're going to get the money. I want to be able to say things like that: um, different Quest resolutions, th. This is something obviously I'm a big fan.

Of been doing it since Fallout, where we had combat Solutions and stealth Solutions and dialogue Solutions, and then in The Outer Worlds I added leadership Solutions, which is basically being able to do things through your companions that you otherwise wouldn't be able to do. Love that stuff. I especially love it when Quest resolutions lead to different endings of the game, that the game monitors enough of the quests and not just the very last Quest you did, but monitors several of the quests you do, even if that — what - what that means is the Last Quest itself — varies based on all the things that you did prior to that. I love that kind of stuff.

I don't like it when a game says: oh, we're totally reactionary to the player and what it does is in the last 10 minutes of the game it says: do you want to go a, b or c? It's like gee, that's. That's not exactly the player agency I had in mind. In fact, let's flip that and talk about things that reduce player agency, the you could just say the opposite of everything I just said. You could say: well, not having a bunch of different character builds, not having a bunch of systemic options or dialogue choices or different ways of doing quests — yes, those all reduce player agency. But I'm talking about a few extra things that, again, the designer deliberately did to restrict the player. One would be any event in the game. That's unavoidable.

Especially I'm looking at cutcenes and like I hate cut scenes that aren't skippable. But if a particular cut scene which plays, which advances, the story always plays through the same way, no matter what I did, it makes me feel like I'm not really having much impact. Similarly, if there are events in the world that always have to be dealt with the same way, like when you get up to this bad person, you just always have to kill him. You can't take him into custody, you can't, convince him of the er's ways, you can't join him and go.

Hey, I, I approve of your evil ways. Let's be evil together.

I — the game to me has a little less agency, and I, the Continuum. It's a little farther to no agency and I dislike it as much along those lines. Unkillable NPCs fall into that category, for me, if you make a game where it appears like you can kill everybody and everything — you're killing dragons — it feels really weird that somebody back in town is completely able. Now, if you need someone to be around for a while, I understand having them talk to you through an intercom or calling you on your phone, but if you actually meet someone face to face and you literally cannot kill them, I hate that because it's the hand of the designer smacking you in the face and saying: nope, I'm just not going to allow you to do that, even though everything that led up to this made you believe you could do it. In fact, that kind of reduced agency is what I hate the most.

It's when the designer deliberately restricts you from something that you've been doing for hours, because in that case, I believe, the hand of the designer appears very clumsy. It's the designer basically forcing you to do something or to not be able to do something, just because they want their game played a certain way. I'm not one of those designers who thinks a game should be played a certain way. I just feel like, okay, I will try to think of all the different ways you can do this and I'll have the game react. The game will the, storyline will still proceed. It may just proceed in a very different direction. You may not like that direction, but guess what?

You were the one who decided to kill these people or take their things or, you know, uh, steal from the vendor or whatever. Those are things you decided to do and now you have to live with the consequences. So let me sum up: player agency. I love it I think it's a Continuum.

I'm not talking about things that are budget or game restrictions. I'm talking about when a designer deliberately decides to allow or restrict the player from doing something. Personally, I love when that, when you take that Contin and push things as far to the edge as you can, where you allow — excuse me, you allow — the player to do. As much as he wants and have those effects show up in the game. It encourages replayability. It's impressive when games react dramatically and I think it makes the game that much more interesting. So those are my thoughts on player agency.
