+++
title = "About My Notes..."
date = "2023-06-27"
id = "P0NKR9R0XTg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Note-Taking"]
summary = "Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about my note-taking system I've had a lot of questions about."
references = []
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about my note-taking system I've had a lot of questions about.

You know, in the telling of these stories, sometimes I go into excruciating detail and it's because I've always kept a lot of notes, and I'm going to talk about what that is. I'll even show you a few, but it's nothing amazing. It's not like you're going to leave here going. I have a whole new journaling system in my life. I'm just going to talk to you about what I did and why I can talk about a lot of things with a lot of tail. Even then I try to run some of my stories by people I've worked with to make sure: is this what happened? Because sometimes I read something in my journal when I don't remember it, but I wrote it down right after it happened.

So just to start, so I got my first job at Pegasus, which later turned into cyberon, when I was 16. And I worked there until I was 20..

I have no notes from them. I was a teenager, I was so excited that I had a job in the game industry it didn't occur to me to ever write anything down. So most of my stories — and I don't have a lot — are like the highest highs and the lowest lows from that period, um, everything else totally forgotten.

So I went to college. I actually worked there a little bit in college, but when I took, when I was in college, I took a lot of notes. But then I went to grad school, grad school really burns note-taking into you. I mean, from the very first quarter you're, you only take, uh, two classes because I began. I began in a math. It was a PhD program, but you got your Masters. So the first year and a half was intensive studying, while you also had to be a teaching assistant, so your days were full and then you were up late at night doing incredible homework sets, just insane things. But the one of the classes I had assumed you had had, automata Theory, which my undergraduate computer science did not teach. And when I mentioned that to the professor he was like well, too bad, go learn it, which he meant go on my own to the library and learn automatic theory on my own. He said: you have a computer science undergraduate degree.

You're here to learn how to be a researcher and a teacher, a professor, figure it out, you can teach yourself. So I did. I had to learn automatic theory and then later neural networks. Another thing: my undergraduate degree didn't cover um and I learned neural networks so well that I ended up being the TA for the undergraduate neural networks class. But I had to teach that to myself, which meant I had to take a lot of notes. And also, especially when you turn in some really big problem sets, you expected to show your work, including references, and later, when you did your research, you had to sometimes defend it, not just written but in oral defenses. So you better know your stuff and you better have taken a lot of notes, because if they asked you a question you better be able to say: oh, that's based off this binary split tree algorithm first made by German Professor blah. You better be able to do that.

So grad school taught me to take notes. A side effect of this is I know when I was telling someone my ad stories, especially from grad school. I don't have to remember those because I have a lot of them written down. So all that stuff about the anti-paladin and the 18 Charisma Druid, I have the notes on that, I've written it down. I mean I could tell you some stories about that group, um, they're poor pixie follower anyway. So I have notes and because what would happen is after the sessions, I'd often write them down and sometimes someone else there would write them down. So we have these stories we can tell.

So by the time I started working at interplay in 91, I was a contractor. I mean I was working at home, which meant I often had to write a lot of notes. So when I went in once a week to talk to the producer, I would remember what I wanted to say. Also as a contractor — you have to keep track of the money you're making because you're self-employed. So you have to do quarterly taxes in the United States. So I took extensive notes on exactly what I'd done so I could tell my producer questions I had, so I could ask him and other people when I would go to interplay once a week and also as I got paid. All this went into.

Actually it was lotus123 and I actually have those digital files, and a few years ago — probably more than 10 — I converted them to excel, which I started using Excel — probably - so there's a Lotus 123 — in the early 90s, and then switched to excel in the late 90s and then I started using a program for Microsoft called Microsoft money, which has been sunseted, but I still have the program running because I like it. Um, so I can basically go back to 1991 and tell you all the money I earned and all the money I spent, by category. That's why you know, when I was talking about my Fallout 1 bonus, I went and looked it up. I know exactly what my bonus was. I know what all my bonuses were at interplay.

I know that I was, you know, when Leonard and Jason and I had to underpay ourselves because there just wasn't enough money to pay all the employees and the expenses of starting up Troika and ourselves. We just didn't pay ourselves and that was a scary time because the um I'm still using Lotus. No, I think I was on Excel by then. It was showing a lot less money is coming in than it's going out and that's why I ended up refinancing my house. It reset my loan but it let me pay several hundred dollars less towards the mortgage every month and I really needed that. It basically wasn't money I had it. Just let me go.

Into debt more slowly, so the beginning of interplay, my finances were digital, but I tended to do things on paper. Um, I'd write down um, when I worked on uh, the first game — I worked on their Rags to Riches — I got everything from the producers on paper, sometimes napkins from restaurants we went to. I could have sworn I had one. I went to go find it I cannot find it I then went to look. I'm sure I took a picture of it. If I threw it out, I couldn't find that. So I remember the napkin, though, because I had a picture of Lucy luster from ranks riches and then a message from her which included swear words because we were at lunch and I believe there were margaritas, but I digress, we. So it started paper. I eventually became more electronic by the end of interplay.

Sadly, a lot of that. Stuff was lost because when I left I had to leave everything behind. However, I realized I kept. I would come home at night and often write notes at home — those I still had, um. That was something I'm glad I did, because by the time I reached Troika I was keeping extensive notes, um, mostly electronic. But because I own Troika, every time I got a new company I had the hard drive copied. I moved it to the new hard drive, which was always bigger. Because you know, back in the late 90s, early 2000s, we were things were expanding like crazy so I could always keep the old stuff. So I have everything. I have every image of every hard drive, of every machine I had at Troika. So that's why I have all my notes, all the design, Docs, meeting notes, everything.

I kept doing that when I went to carbine, but a big difference was I started doing a lot of it after work. I would Journal, basically I would write down everything that happened that day in a very, very formatted way, electronically. It was like the date. Here's what happened today.

The side effect of that was I not only still have all those things, um, because they were mine, they were intermixed a lot with a lot of personal stuff, which is why that Disneyland story: I remember being at Disneyland one day and I journaled about it and like this is a lot like you know, making an RPG level. And then, when I Googled it, I found out that Marty sklar, the imagineer, had written a book about how to put together Disneyland and how the imagineers should be thinking, and I realized that all those rules apply to level designers and I have a journal interviewing. Like, wow, this is amazing, I should do a talk about it. So I did at 2010. I did gave a talk and uh at carbine about that very topic, which I've done here, and I did it again in obsidian a few, you know, 10 years later, all thanks to the fact that I kept all these journals. Now carbine ended not well. I'll eventually talk about that.

It's not a good story, um. It has its ups and downs, like every place, but it's not a good story and I kind of like I didn't really like talking a lot about how, walking away from Fallout 2, it's the same thing at carbine. It's just the second time, second and only time in my career I walked away from a project that was in progress. But I'm very proud to say, both of those games shipped and I'm happy to say. That every game I ever worked on — well, every game ever got paid to work on.

So when I started obsidian, I did not want to be lead. I told him that, which is funny because you know I was there for less than a month and they asked me to be a lead on a Strike Team and I'm like nope. So for years I just was basically my Tarawa senior programmer and I did some design on the side. I have very few notes from that period. It's one of the reasons I haven't talked a lot about South Park or pillars or tyranny.

It's not that long ago, but I'm gonna have to do it all for memory. I did not take notes. Um, I pretty much stopped taking notes in early 2000, 12.. So within a few months of leaving carbine I slowly stopped taking notes about things. Until just I finally stopped. I did not restart taking notes until The Outer Worlds, and when I did that I went back to paper. And I did that for a couple reasons: one, I wanted to be something I could keep and two, I wanted it to be something that I mean I could. I could and did digitize it later, but it was nice to have this physical thing and I still have It's this book right here.

I'm sure people remember me having this. I carried around everywhere I went at work and away from work. It has this lovely artwork on the left on the front where I drew a little rocket, and it is full of notes and most of them are just, um, you know dates like.

Here's a page where I'm not talking about the music. I want music, One ambient, how I want the module set up, transition music, main menu, Combat music and all that, and then I talk about the music Styles I want to do. I mean, these are just the kind of notes I took so that when I actually met with the music director, the audio director, I'd be able to pull this out and go: here's what I want you to do. Sometimes I have meetings and after the meetings, often at night, that that night I would write down and hear everything that happened and that was important to me, because I knew that sometimes I would forget things later. I mean, this is my beginning of my 40th year, so I've been in the industry for 30 years — exactly when I started at obsidian and I just wanted to kind of keep my head straight and go — this is the stuff that I want to remember, because I had all those notes. When I semi-retired I kept a new Journal. This is a journal I started. Um, I think I started it. Let's see if I've got any dates on here, if I dated these.

That's so dumb it's. These aren't dated, but it's like here's post-apocapocalyptic idea number one and it's two pages and then you turn the page and it's post-apocalyptic idea number two.

It's just. I just I wrote everything down.

It's like ideas on setting and ideas on story and ideas on what Unique Mechanics it would have, and I have a ton of them. Here's me still trying to work out the shape stuff. Um, I just have tons of ideas for things.

Uh, on different apocalypse — not anything like the other post-apocalyptics one. Different ideas of how to do stats or how to do perks, of how to do exploration in a game of.

There's an outline of uh talks. I wanted to give my Lord of Light game design is in here, so this is not even full, so I'm still putting things in here. I'm just not filling it as fast because I'm retired and I don't need to do that, but I do have a lot of stuff that I could. I mean, if someone came up to me tomorrow with a bag of money and said: you have to take that, you have to make a game, I wouldn't have to invent anything. I basically got Trove of stuff, so I've taken all that and I did like I said. I digitized the stuff that wasn't digital.

The Fallout notes alone are 80, some pages. Um, I ended up writing this book, printed it out solid. It's over 500 pages.

It's my entire career, like I said, I'm not gonna give this away to anybody. I've had a few people read it and they said it was really dry also, several people said, well, it's kind of mean and I'm like how and when we talked about it, they said, well, it's weird. It doesn't sound mean when you talk about it, but it sounds mean when I read it. So hence this channel. Um, people viewing said I mean, I've had some negative stuff in here that I've said, but overwhelmingly it's pretty positive because you know what, after 42 years, I can say it was a pretty fun career I had, but some bad stuff happened in it and I don't want to avoid that stuff and I have notes that explain them in detail. But at the same time, you know, actually I used to explain to people.

It's like I didn't dig ditches and I didn't save people through open heart surgery. I basically made computers go beep boop. People loved the beeping and the booping that I made, but ultimately I made games. I did not save the world, so I try not to take it overly seriously. I think that comes across better in the channel than it does in my writing. So that's pretty much it. Um, that's kind of how my note taking evolved over a lot of years and how I got to where I am now and even why I'm doing this channel.
