+++
title = "Event Systems"
date = "2025-03-03"
id = "P935C85WIpU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Programming", "NPCs"]
summary = "I talk about how event systems work and why you might want to use them in your RPGs."
references = ["2tfhirqSito", "OXdyfCNcahw", "QWAetn0Ch9I"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Event Systems.

These are some that I mentioned a while back in a video on NPC reactions, which I'll link below, and last Friday I even mentioned NPCs triggering off each other, which talks about Event Systems as well, while the first video LED Lemmings 19 to ask: would you be interested in doing a video focused on events, how they're triggered, how they're handled, how they work, exist in single player versus multiplayer games like wild star, caveats, issues, problems, technical or otherwise, and whatever else you think is worth talking about? Sure, this is going to be probably aimed at programmers. I'm not going to give you implementation details, but any programmer who's had more than one data structures class will know what I'm talking about when I'm saying: hey, you need to make a list of events. Maybe you want an array, maybe you want a link list, maybe you want a doubly link list, maybe you want a stack and you probably don't want to. Stack anyway. You might want to Hash anyway.

Let's talk about Event. Systems are basically a Systems. Event Systems are basically. A programmer makes you a general event system, which is a list of things — events to check to see if they should fire. There are things, there are systems that can put stuff into the event queue and then other things that listen for an event to fire. They can listen to them by any kind of thing they want. They can listen to by event type, by who caused the event, by who the event is triggering on.

We'll get to that. I I try to think about how this would vary in single versus multiplayer games and the only thing I can think of is most events have conditions under which they should fire and as long as one of those conditions is testing to see if the players there is present for it. Like if you want someone to react to a play player who did something, they're only going to react if the player is present. So in a multiplayer game, if another player goes by that NPC, it's not going to trigger because the other player isn't present.

That's probably sufficient, otherwise the Event Systems might be pretty similar. So let's talk about how these Event Systems generally work. So the, so the event system is a queue of events. These events can be placed into the queue from anywhere in the game. Combat might do it, the skill system might do it, the dialogue system might do it. What kind of events do they put in there? They might put in: hey, something just died, and the event includes.

Every event generally includes its type and a Tim stamp and a location. It almost always includes who C who's triggering the event. In which case it's the thing that died — and then, based on what event type it is, it may include other data like who killed me and did I see anything else around me at the time, and all that can just get bundled up in the event data and stuck in the queue. You might also want to queue up if a skill was used successfully, so, like someone picked a lock, you might cue that event. You also may want to record if it was unsuccessful. Someone tried to pick a lock and failed.

Throw that in the event system, the. It may even be something as simple as the player sold an item. They went to an — an NPC who has a shop — and they sold an item.

Throw that in the event queue. All of this depends on your design. You want to be thinking about what. Do you want? The game, and the NPCs and creatures and narrator and anything in the game you want.

What do you want it to react to? If you want it to react to something later, you probably need an event Cube — one of the things here that your programmers are going to have to figure out with the designers — or how? Exactly what event do you need? For example, if you make the entire game and the only thing that you think needs an event when it dies are cystypigs, because you're going to have a companion that gets really mad if you kill too many cystypigs. So you need to throw an event every time a cist pig is killed and it adds to some counter, and when it gets high enough and the companion with you, he's like: I can't believe you killed a dozen cystypigs.

You're a murderer, if that's all you need you. Probably just need an event: cystypig died. However, if the design calls for reacting to different things dying — maybe it's a Cissy Pig, maybe it's this particular NPC who's the boss of a gang, and maybe there's another place where you need to count how many times you know a wolf is killed — then you probably need a general event which is just creature died and then part of its event data is what creature died and what type it is, and all that. The way Event Systems work is. The event queue is checked, every update, it receives an update which you know in unity is every frame.

In Arcanum, it was a heartbeat that we kept on, the you know, and so things got a heartbeat which could be anywhere from every 2 seconds to every 10th of a second. Events can be queued to happen immediately, and I'll tell you in a minute why you would still want to cue it, even if it's going to trigger immediately. Others have times they should happen, which is like 5 minutes from now have this event happen. Others may be like every Tuesday at midnight. Trigger this event, which means the event, when it triggers, says oh, I'm every Tuesday at midnight and after it triggers itself, it reasserts itself in the queue to happen again.

Some events can do that, they can reinsert themselves. But some events will have conditions like: I'm in the queue and you should only fire me when the player camps or when the player enters this particular town. I want this event to fire, so there might be a time queue for events and a location queue for an event and maybe even a camp queue, if that's something that can happen anywhere and at any time. So the um. The like, the location queue, is checked every time the player enters a new location.

Is there any vent? Waiting in the location queue, waiting to Fire? And then, when the player camps, it checks the camp queue. You don't necessarily need to do that y though. You can just have a general queue and those sit at the at the near the front, and whenever the player camps, it goes: hey, is there any camping queue in here? This is an optimization thing which I'll talk about in a minute. Effectively, when a condition fires, an event meets its condition, it fires and it's reported to every listener. And that's the cool thing.

Events can have listen and listeners register themselves. When a system starts up in your game, it can say: hey, I want to be notified when an event in the queue meets this condition. It might be, I want to know when. Anyone dies, or it might be. I just want to be told when a cystypig dies and, depending on how you implement it, may just have to be told whenever anyone dies and then it looks itself to see if it was a cystypig or it may. It may be able to register. Hey, I want to know when this event that meets this condition. So that way the event system only calls the listeners for events that trigger their the condition.

It's up to your programmer how to do that and it depends again on your design. The cool thing is one event can have multiple listeners that trigger for it, which means you can have one event in the queue and it's like: oh, I need to call these three different systems that all cared about someone dying. They now they can be called for a certain event type or event. Specifics. Um, you may want to register something saying let me know when ever the player does something, so the player is marked as the initiating event, or it may be: let me call me whenever the player is responsible for something, so the player is the one, it's not the. The event isn't happening to the player like someone died, but the player is the reason the event's happening.

So people might register listening for all kinds of things. The Listener decides whether it wants to respond and because maybe it was something it didn't care about, or maybe the, reason it cared about it, no longer exists, maybe it wanted to report it to an NPC who's dead now. And if they want to respond, they can either respond immediately or their response can be their own event and this event might go back in the general queue, or it might go. On their own event queue, which means we should probably talk about why you might want multiple event cues. You might have that public General event queue and I talked about. It might break up into a, public location queue and a public camping queue, which is anybody can see, but there's also private event cues. These are cues that exist on a particular NPC or one of your companions or boss or creature.

There may even be ones in locations, just for a location, so it's private to that location. The event can only update if that creature is currently loaded and active, or you're entering that location or — and that means the NPC is probably near the player or is a companion in the player's party. You don't need to implement private event cues. You can have a general event queue that handles all of this. That that way you have.

A centralized, like Clearing House of all events in your game. But it might be more efficient to have private cues and again, this depends on your design. If you have lots and lots of events and many of them are tied to a particular creature or a particular location, you might want to go with private event cues. This is an optimization that your programmer will have to decide to make after he sees your design. So see the video I have on how to do optimization and designers. This is why you need to be as specific as possible when you make your design docs. If you give a half completed design dock to a programmer and they look at it and go, I don't say any need to have private event CU, so I'm making a general one. And then later you're like: oh, by the way, I need all the NPCs and especially bosses, to be able to respond to specific events, and that tank your, game's, performance. And then you get mad at the programmer for not foreseeing something you didn't ask for. That's on you, so everybody should watch that optimization video. Let me tell you the two biggest reasons I like using event cues in my game.

One: the designer will care about. One, the programmer will care about the design. One is event cues: let you delay an event until a time or condition occurs. This is really great. Designers will love this because it lets you do things like zombies all spawn in this um Cemetery at midnight or once the player has wielded this amulet, and as long as he's wearing it, these assassins will spawn occasionally as Random Encounters to attack him and try to get the amulet back. Designers love this kind of thing because it lets them have.

The game react, but not immediately. Programmers like event cues because it helps with something called scope, where systems don't have to know about each other to work with the event system. For example, your skill system may know nothing about your AI system, but an AI may want to know. Hey, let me know if a lockpick was successful, because I need to tell nearby guards if they saw it. Now the skill doesn't know anything about the AI system, so it doesn't want to call in every time you successfully pick a lock. It doesn't want to have to know.

I have to call this AI routine on guards. Maybe I have to collect every guard in the area and call this routine on them to see if they care about this lock being picked. They don't have to know anything about that, all they have to.

Do is go: oh, the player successfully picked this lock. I'm going to put this event, this location this time, this lock, this player and they were successful at lockpicking. Boom, it goes on the queue, maybe it's set for immediate processing and it calls listeners and the nearby guards have set themselves to be listeners for that event. They're watching out for successful lockpicks, if that event comes in, every guard gets it and they're like, if I can see the player, if I'm aimed towards the player and he's within range and he's not using stealth or whatever boom that triggers, and I can say, hey, what are you doing over there on that lock? What's great about that is the skill system just posted in the event system and the AI system had just reg registered itself in the event system. They both see the event system and they know nothing about. Each other and they don't care anything about each other.

And what's great about this is later when the designers are like: oops, I forgot, I wanted to add another skill to the game called disarm trap, and I also want that to you know. Have an event pended for it. You can do it. You've the skill system can just You can already talk to the event system. You just make a new event, throw it in there and then whoever wants to listen to it can listen to it. This is why I love Event Systems. This is a very high level description of how to make an event system.

I've been using these for decades in my games. It really helps you create not just NPC reactivity but General game reactivity. Designers like it, programmers like it, my guess is artists like it too, and even if they don't know about it. They like it, so everybody likes it. So I hope this answered your question. Lemmings 19.
