+++
title = "Thoughts On An Arcanum Remake"
date = "2024-01-08"
id = "pgn2sQ4vAkU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "Game Design", "IP"]
summary = "Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about thoughts on an Arcanum remake."
references = ["z-onK2K2_k0", "hUrNahAr5ho", "bTQzNiXH56U"]
+++

Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about thoughts on an Arcanum remake.

Uh, I've had different questions about it I even touched upon this a little bit in the video I did on Arcanum as a Windows 10 app, where I actually have Arcanum up and running in Windows 10, and I talked about some things I might do about it, but I didn't finish the thought. I didn't do it as completely as I did say in the video called thoughts on a Fallout remake. So I'll link those two videos below, but I want to do this one, which it will kind of collect all my thoughts on.

If I was to do a remake of Arcanum today, what would I do? And by remake I want to stress that what I mean is it's still Arcanum. I mean it still plays like Arcanum. I don't want to change the story.

Just what were things that it shipped with that I wished I had fixed or balanced, and also what were some things that I wish I had gotten done before it shipped, that I would have added if I had more time, which basically means more money. So I think the obvious thing to start with is, yes, I would fix the bugs that we shipped with and I'd also balance a lot of the skills and spells and even some of the attribute effects. And I've mentioned like I wish Beauty did a little more. I wish that harm wasn't the go-to spell because of how it is. Just it's too fast to cast and it does too much damage and it scales to too much damage. So I'd fix all those things, and, yes, I realized those have been fixed in a lot of fan patches. In fact, I'd probably look at what fans did and see what people's reactions were to those patches to guide my own balance goals, because if I'm thinking about doing something, that was already done in a fan patch and everybody hated it, maybe I'll rethink doing it.

Um, the other thing I would certainly do is I would make Arcanum run in a higher resolution, which would include two things. I would make the UI fit more nicely in that resolution, probably even give the option to run it with a — the original UI, but shrunk down to the center, middle and then the upper corners, or a new, more modern, Sleek UI where I basically push things to the corners and there's not even anything there. Um, when you don't need it, for example, a lot of you know modern games don't show you a health bar unless you're injured or you're in combat, so that would go away. Um, one thing I'd love to do if this really was a funded remake, is try to recover the original art files, which I do. Not have, and render everything at a high, resolution, barring that we'd have to upscale it, which is still pretty good.

Ups scalers are pretty good these days. Um, just because if I want it to run in higher resolution, I don't want it to be pixelated if you expand it or let it run, you know, with the camera farther out, with much smaller uh Sprites I think I've mentioned I'd yank multiplayer. We only put that in there because we had to. I don't really think it's part of Arcanum. I don't think there are people out there pining for multiplayer. Arcanum, I certainly am not yanking.

Multiplayer means so many things can be done. We can rip out all the code for finding servers and the connection to the world opponent Network, the wand stuff, which doesn't even exist anymore. I mean all that code can just be flushed, everything will.

Look cleaner. Um, there's a lot of things that were done in code because we had to assume that we couldn't calculate it locally. That code can be either cleaned up or removed. I would almost certainly make the game turn-based only if I don't need multiplayer. The only reason I had real time it was for multiplayer, so I'd probably get rid of multiplayer.

And then, because it's turn-based only, there's a bunch of cool stuff I can do one. I can balance everything, for that in real time there was this: like you had to introduce the idea, maybe, of a cool down on things so you couldn't cast them so quickly. You had to do all sorts of things to make sure that the player didn't do things faster than made sense, but in turnbas you got your turns. When your turn is over, you're not doing anything.

Also, I could make a lot of cool improvements to the turnbas model things. Some of the things I did, um, in Temple things like when enemies go, when on enem is on their turn, you can have them skip movement or make their movement really fast, just so their turns go faster. You can make enemies that have sequential initiative just Clump together and go at the same time, maybe even group enemies, and those groups have one Initiative for everybody. So let's say there was a necromancer and he had hired two Bandits and he summoned a bunch of zombies. Maybe the Necromancer is on one initiative role, the bandits are on a second and the zombies are on a third. I think that would be super fun because then you would see you go: oh no, it's the Bandit's turn, oh no, it's the zombies turn.

But still that would only be three times, it's not. Your turn — as opposed to if there were, you know, one Necromancer, two Bandits and five zombies. That would be eight times where it wasn't your turn. So I think turn base could be a lot cooler and a lot more fun and your downtime would be a lot less. One thing that I really wanted to do in the base game — I'm not sure I ever talked about this. Maybe I did when I talked about procedural sector generation — is something I never got working and, in some case, never even got to start on — was procedurally generated ruins and caves. So if I'm going to procedurally generate a sector, if there's a sector that no human artist or designer has gone in touched and it's completely being generated procedurally, I wanted to be able to make ruins or even caves and dungeons that were procedurally generated, so that the world Not only was a lot more richer and had a lot more cool stuff to explore, but it gave people who like doing that a like, tons of extra hours of play time, and every time you replayed Arcanum it would be different. I think that could be super fun. Never, ever did that.

What I love about it is it doesn't change any multiplayer. I mean — sorry, it doesn't change any main story Quest or side quest at all. Anything that's done by hand still exists and any sector it touches will never be modified by this code. But what it does mean is if you just wander into a forest or wander up into a mountain, you may find a cave or an old castle or a dungeon. I think that could be really cool.

Something I did try doing and could not figure out how to get working right and abandon was doing roads I wanted. Roads that connected all the cities and Villages and potentially even major plac is like if there was a castle or Fort or something. They would be connected with roads as well. The idea was it was faster to travel along the roads, so over map travel — world map travel — was faster along roads. Also, they had completely separate encounter tables, so roads may have guards along them, but Bandits are going to concentrate on roads because that's where the Caravans are monsters. Some, monsters may be more often encountered on roads — the smarter ones, where other monsters may never be encountered along roads.

I love that idea. There's a lot of issues with this, which not only generating the roads in the world map level, but then having them look correct at the sector level where they don't just cut through a mountain or go over a river or, if they do, a bridge is generated for that River. So all that stuff would have to be handled. Also, Road intersection, that's — uh, I believe Road generation itself might be an NP complete problem, depending on how it's framed. So a lot of work there, but I think it would be cool.

I'd probably restore the option for how I wanted the game to be, which is not everything — to be one point, uh, because the code still there. I can just put it in as an option. If you want to play single point Arcanum the way it originally shipped, that's an option. If you want to play multi-point, that's an option. I'd also get rid of the level cap. The way Arcanum worked, we only put in the level cap so that you would be forced to make new characters, so you wouldn't eventually be able to have a character that had everything you know, every. Skill and uh, every uh spell and every Tech schematic and everything. But I know lot people like to play without a level cap.

Certainly be trivial for Arcanum to remove that, so I would. I would probably also — and this is just for fun and just because, since it's me making the Remake, I get to do this — I would put in a hook for the idea we had for Arcanum 2. I have a video about that.

I'll link that below too, but it was called Journey to the Center of Arcanum. I would add a couple locations and a couple NPCs and some dialogues. That would just hint that that is something that is going on.

Um, maybe Franklin Payne the great Explorer disappears before the end of the game, or maybe you can meet him at his house with his wife and he's building his Subterranean boring machine. But it's not ready, yet, it doesn't work and there is no giant hole in the ground.

That's the kind of stuff I would love to add so that when you're playing the base game you're like, oh, that's interesting, and maybe there's a quest that takes you there and there some seems some reason, that thing exists, that area exists, but then it turns out when you play Arcanum 2: oh, that's why that was there. That's fun. Those are the kind of things I want to do. So I would not touch the storyline, the dialogues, any of the quests. I think they're fine, except to fix bugs. I'd leave all that alone, but anyway, I think that's everything on my list of what I would do if I were to make an Arcanum remake today. So hope you like that.
