+++
title = "Temple Of Elemental Evil Design Highlights"
date = "2025-12-01"
id = "PGtFMspiEC0"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Temple of Elemental Evil", "Press Event", "Game Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Temple of Elemental Evil design highlights."
references = ["Fo-tYpW9m98", "N6CQioYCDhM", "pX-FQ393pwo"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Temple of Elemental Evil design highlights.

This is a document I found in my archive. I was looking through it for something else, but I thought I'd share this because for all you people out there who are developing games, at some point you're going to be asked to promote this game, maybe to press or maybe to fans, maybe at a conference or a convention, or maybe in a recorded interview or a playthrough. You should know what is important to talk about at such interviews and events, including what makes your game special or unique or why the press should be interested in it or why a player would want to play it I was asked by Atari to make this list, which they asked me. They said: "Could you make some design highlights". This was because they were already planning for press events. This is dated May 13th 2003., there was a press event coming up in August, which is just a few months away. I wasn't going to do that press event. That was going to be somebody else on the team. They had a family emergency. Someone else said they'd do it, but they didn't have a passport that was valid, so I did it I have a video on this. It's the Temple of Elemental Evil. Press event Took place in August 2003 in a castle south of London.

There's a whole video on that, so this is something I wrote up a few months before that for someone else to use. This was well after the press event for Arcanum, which happened in 2001.. So I was and I have a video on that.

All this will be linked in the description. So I was prepared. I was used to, between you know, Fallout and Arcanum. I knew what press wanted to hear, Um. So this is something I was equipped to write and it's an example.

Of how to prepare for such things. I have a video called talking to the press, where I try to, you know, tell you how you can prepare to doing any kind of press event. Consider what I'm going to show you today. I'm going to read to you a concrete example of how to do such preparation, because you can go play Temple of Elemental Evil or just watch videos of it, of other people playing it, and you can see what the game is. And then you can watch this and see what I thought was important to call out about the game. So let's just get right into it and I will read you what I wrote.

This is Tempo of Elemental Wevil — design highlights. Here are some of the design highlights I will be sure to mention every time I show the game to someone And I just go in order. I've got a bunch of bullet points here — Strict adherence to 3.5 rules. And also I will mention this is the first computer RPG to use 3.5 rules. I actually think it might have been the first one to use 3.0, but somebody said no, They thought Never Winter Nights did. But we were definitely the first: 3.5..

In fact our inherence is going to be so strict that there's going to be a section in the manual, There's going to be an appendix in the manual that will list every rule we had to not implement or change And I remember one example of those was we didn't put horses in the game. So any horse related skill — and there were a few — and any abilities were basically not put in the game and we will call that out in the appendix So players will know exactly what is the same as the. Paper and pencil tabletop D and D 3.5 and our game. The next one is we have multiple paths through the game, Not just when you're in the middle of it, but we have multiple starting points and multiple ending points. This is something that I think is really important, because we love to talk about nonlinearity and different ways you can go through a game, but this is the first time I've seen a game with multiple starts depending on something the player picks, which was alignment, and then lots of different endings, which were based on lots of things, most of which is how the player chose to behave during the game. This led me to saying: um, we have a lot of support for alignmentbased play. In addition to some characters you know, like paladins have to be lawful, good and assassins have to be evil, We have dialogues and endings that change. Based on the player or the party: alignment. This is in addition to all those different starts.

Next point was, in addition to all what I me just mentioned about alignment, dialogues can change and have reaction based on a lot of things that the player may have done or picked, Not limited to dialogue skills, intelligence, class abilities, reputation, and reputation is based on everything the player's already done with different groups. All that will affect dialogues they're having with NPCs in the game. It will open up some dialogue branches and close off other dialogue branches. Another thing we supported was simultaneous combat turns for enemies, Meaning when enemies roll the same initiative and they would normally all go one after the other. We will just let you, if you want, let them all go simultaneously.

This will speed up combat when it's not the player's turn. So instead of having to wait for those four zombies to go, all four zombies go at once and then it's the player's turn again for one of his player characters. This was something that we thought was so important that we wanted to call out, because many people don't like turnbased because it's so slow. This speeds it up, and the next thing I think is important — because I love it — is precise spell targeting. When you play a tabletop version of D and D and you say "I want to do a fireball somewhere", You can put something down on the table and you can see exactly who's going to get fireballed, because it's your turn and nobody's moving. A lot of D and D games, when they're adapted for computer, get turned into real time or real time with pause and they lose precision spellcasting. This is a turnbased implementation of Dn D, The same way it's played on tabletop. Is how you're going to be playing it on the computer And we have that precise spell targeting. When you throw out a spell that's got an area of effect, it displays the area of effect. You can use that area of effect to decide who gets hit and that is who will get hit by the spell. No guessing, no crossing your fingers, no hoping an enemy wanders out or doesn't wander out of the area of effect or, worse, some friendly wandering into the area of effect.

The next thing we support are magic item creation feats. This means players can make their own magic item if their character has that feat and has experience points that they want to spend towards its creation. Why this is important is we are putting in more magic items than appear in the game. That means the player can use his meta, his magic creation. Feat, to make an item that doesn't appear in the module.

It will never drop. The only way to get that item is to make it yourself. Similarly, a lot of items just appear in loot drops from chests or from creatures. So it's random whether they're appear, so they may be there on one playthrough but not on another, which means the random number generator just may make that item never appear in your playthrough.

Magic item creation feats: let you make it anyway. And this is really important to some players because they may make a character whose build is very dependent on getting a certain magic item. Similarly, we support metamagic feats. The metamagic feats are feats that affect how spells work, like quicken spell.

Again, this is important for especially experienced players who want to make a particular kind of build. They want to play their magic user a certain way. They want to play their spellcaster a certain way That requires them to have those meta magic feeds. In the same vein, we have support for magic users calling a familiar and for animal companions, for characters like rangers. Some games don't have that, or it's a fixed familiar or fixed animal companion. We don't have that. We let you throw that call familiar spell. We let you get a different animal companion who adventures with you as you go along and works the way you expect it to work, like the tabletop version of D&D 3.5., similarly, we have support for fallen paladins. That's when paladins misbehave and lose their paladin abilities and become a regular fighter until they get atoned. I shouldn't say support, Let's just say paladins can fall in this game if they misbehave. Calling it support makes it sound like we, encourage it. We don't. We're talking. About a paladin who drinks too much alcohol or does anything that would fall outside of what a lawful, good oathabiding paladin should do. They can fall and then they have to deal with that.

And then, finally, I want to mention Iron Man mode. Iron Man mode is a special difficulty mode in this game where you only given one save game When you start up. It loads from that save game, if it exists. You and you play. You can't save, You can only say I'm done for now and then it will save it back out to that save game. You only have one save game slot. If you die, that save game is wiped.

The reason this is so important is this is exactly how tabletop D and D works. You can't be playing D and D and the party wipes on some encounter and you turn to the GM, the DM. And say: "Can we go back to the last checkpoint save". There is no checkpoint save, so Iron Man mode kind of makes the game work just like tabletop, where you're playing. You can walk away and do something else, You can shut down the game and it will save your state, but if you die you're dead.

Some fun facts I wrote down and this is: these fun facts are the equivalent of sound bites that when you're doing an interview you hope you have a sound bite which is something that gets quoted. So I made some fun facts that I could write down because I know those will be picked up in interviews. And the fun facts were: in addition to our main story quest, we have 58 different side quests that are available in different places of the game. We have 144 NPCs with dialogue. I'm not counting people, just have a generated dialogue where they float over their head some greeting. I'm talking about an actual dialogue, an actual conversation that you enter into with player options.

We have 35 potential followers, basically hidden all throughout the game in towns and sometimes not towns. There are 35 NPCs that can be picked up and join your party. Additionally, we have 90 different monster types. Those 90 monster types aren't all placed encounters. Some are in random encounter lists so you may have a whole playthrough of the game and not see it.

Some of them were included so that they could be on the monster summoning spells that some classes get, where they can cast a spell and it brings it creates a creature who fights for them. We included them to be used. We included some monster types to be included in spells like that. We have over 230 spells.

I can't give. You an exact number because we're still adding a few and I don't know exactly how many are going to be there by the time we ship, but they're at least 230. And finally, we have 40 maps in the game — explorable maps. If you count building interiors in the towns and a few other places, then we have over a 100 maps, but 40 of those are ones you're expected to explore and possibly fight in and stuff like that. But there's over a hundred if you count building interiors.

And then I was asked to actually do a deep dive into the dialogue reaction that I mentioned earlier. If you want to see dialogue reaction from an NPC to the player character, here are three ways you can do it. If you talk to Ferno or Spugnoir in the inn in Hamlet while naked, you will see a special dialogue branch open up. If you discuss the tailor's problem at the Taylor's shop in Hamlet using a short player character, meaning a halfling, a gnome or dwarf — it will open up a special branch of dialogue. And then, third, if you talk to the weaver's son-in-law at the weaver's house in Hamlet with a beautiful female player character — and by beautiful I mean a charisma of at least 15, that will also open up a special dialogue branch. Note that you can see all three reactions if you just use a naked, beautiful, short female player character. The whole point of this is to say, hey, somewhere in the game there's an NPC who will react to a choice that the player made, Sometimes at character creation time, sometimes during play, but there's a lot of reactivity in the game and we wanted to point that out. Anyway, I hope you like that. That was my highlight list, for Temple of Elemental Evil and we actually did use that at the press event, uh, in England.
