+++
title = "Why I Like Flawed Characters"
date = "2023-05-09"
id = "phMzoU7DOFA"
status = "production"
tags = ["Character Systems", "GURPS", "Fallout", "The Outer Worlds", "RPG Design"]
summary = "I talk about player characters who have flaws, and why I like this mechanic so much in both tabletop and computer role-playing games."
references = []
+++

Hi, it's me Tim. I've gotten some great feedback on the dumb dialogue video where I talk about the origin of dumb dialogue being restrictions that I put on players in my original D campaign back in late 70s, early 80s. So I wanted to talk about why I like flawed player characters so much and why I think restrictions lead to better role-playing and just better game playing in general.

So, after playing D in high school, I really got into groups in grad school and that's where I first discovered disadvantages, which is in GURPS, things you can buy for your character that aren't good but they give you more points to spend somewhere else. I always wanted to do something like that. Fallout had traits which were good things and bad things glued together. The original Fallout did then kind of lost that. I mean backgrounds Arcanum had some pros and cons. You could always lower stats. When I finally got to The Outer Worlds, I realized I could leverage the same game mechanics or game code that we had in place — place for reactivity. That was basically watching the player's behavior and events that happened to the player — to make flaws.

Flaws aren't really like disadvantages — disadvantages you buy when you make your character and then you're required to play that way. Flaws work the other way. You would play a certain way, the game would notice and go: do you want this flaw? Take a lot of damage from robots. Maybe you have robophobia. Fall down a lot, take damage, maybe you get a fear of heights. So I really like that because it made it more reactive. It made the game feel more reactive than it was watching you and also, it made sense: hey, my player has nearly died five times from robots. Maybe I have a good, healthy fear of them.

This is also, um, this whole idea I have. A flawed characters came from a couple philosophy books that really influenced me, both by Joseph Campbell. One's called The Hero of a Thousand Faces and the other was the book based on his PBS show about that book called The Power of Myth, and in both of those Joseph Campbell talks about when heroes go on journeys. They face a lot of challenges, they learn that they're not perfect, they explore a new realm, they gain a lot more power or boons, and then they come back to the real world. I really liked that. I especially like the fact that heroes had to come to grips with the fact that they were not perfect people, so that's what really originally attracted me to GURPS. And, by the way, not only is it a whole other video about me talking about what philosophy books influence me, it's a whole other video about the whole GURPS special follow-up thing.

But what I want to talk about today were two stories. I will always remember this happened either right before, in the very early stages of making Fallout, I was trying to teach GURPS to people at Interplay — and there were two situations that happened with the same party. So it was Leonard Boyarsky and Chris Taylor and Scott Evers and Spencer Kaye and they had made characters with GURPS. I don't really remember Leonard's and Chris's characters, what they'd made, but the two important ones were: Scotty wanted to make a really good fighter, so he wanted high health, high strength, high dex, so he sacrificed his intelligence, made it, dropped it a bit, but what he really did was to give himself points was he said he was missing an arm.

I remember he said I'll just use a shield or I just won't use a shield, I'll just use a one-handed weapon and no shield. And he made himself an alcoholic, which meant during the day he might start drinking. Spencer made himself a Mage and just said I'm gonna take overweight. And he just took overweight, but he took it at its massively high level, like morbidly obese. And the disadvantage of that was one of the disadvantages — was it slowed his movement rate a great deal. So they decide they're going to go to a dungeon, a dungeon below wizard tower. You know, everybody was like there's gonna be lots of great loot, yet it's several days away. So they have to camp. The first night they're camping, by a swamp. They decide not to go in too dangerous. They make a big bonfire. They're sitting around it talking, nobody's on guard. A some Elemental, some swamp Elemental, firebase, comes out of the swamp to attack them. They quickly realize that they are way over maps, so they make that decision that all parties do since time immemorial and they run away. I point out that the elemental is pretty fast moving and Spencer isn't. I asked them how far they run and Chris Taylor, without missing a beat, says: we run until we can't hear Spencer screaming anymore. Spencer got eaten by that Elemental.

He rolls up a new character, Skinny Mage. Yeah, Skinny's a disadvantage. It gives them other things, like I think he's lost a little strength. They reach the dungeon or they reached the tower. The dungeon is accessible from a trapdoor that has an iron blowout, a metal rung set into a wall. They're going down it. They get there early in the morning, so they're already—they've just woken up. They have all their mana, all their abilities, all their items. They're going down the rungs, and I say, hey, rungs require two hands. It says the rules, if you—only you threw it one-handed—you have to make a dexterity check halfway to see if you fall. Now all of them put away their weapons and they go down two-handed. But Scotty, he's missing an arm, so he says I'll just make the dex check. But I've got a high dexterity and he goes down, he makes the dexterity check. They're in the dungeon.

They do a lot of exploring. They find rooms, they find some loot, they find a few monsters. I think they found some blood-sucking vine and a skeleton attacks them. Uh, they see someone sleeping on a bench and they just sneak by and they don't want to touch that person. They finally come to a room and there's an enormous chasm. It's so deep they can't see how deep it is. Their torches don't even show anything past 30 feet. As they sit there deciding what to do, talking loudly, something rises up out of the chasm. They can't even see it. Oh, it's so big, but it's really big. They see a giant beak here and a bunch of tentacles hanging down below it which reach out. Scotty swipes at one. Being the fighter, it turns out it's way beyond their ability. So once again, they decide to run away.

They reach the rungs. All of them go up. You know Scotty's gotta hold off, hold the monster off. When it's his turn, he's like: okay, I'm gonna run up the ladder. I'm like, you're one-armed and run up the rungs. And he said: I'll make a DEX check. And I'm like: well, you've been down here a few hours. And you have alcoholism. Have you been sipping from your flask? He's like: uh, like you need to make a Will Roll which is based on your END, isn't slow. His Will's even lower. He misses it, which means he's been drinking, which means his DEX is lowered. He starts up the runs, misses his dexterity check, falls back, and the tentacles come down the whole way. Chris Taylor at the top slowly closes the trap door. Scotty gotta eat, so what is the lesson from this?

Flawed characters are fun. Flawed characters are very memorable. Flawed characters introduce a lot of extra challenges into the game that the player brought. I love it. I wish more RPGs had these kinds of negative aspects to a player so that by the end of the game you're not some god walking among the populace. I think it's fun, I think it's great, I think there's a ton more things that can be done in this space. I don't think in any way The Outer Worlds is the end-all, be-all of what you can do in this space, and I'm looking forward to seeing what other people do.

Anyway, I just felt like telling some stories today.

Bye.
