+++
title = "Endings"
date = "2025-09-01"
id = "PJ15olgEW3Q"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about endings."
references = ["NnlnJSaj6z0", "V6rDgA5NXQc"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about endings.

Endings are hard. Beginnings are hard too. In fact, I have a whole video about beginnings and I'll link it below. But this video is going to come out on my birthday. On August 25th, It's my big 6 birthday. So of course I'm thinking a lot about beginnings and also about endings. One of the things I was thinking about was the first TV show I ever watched that had an ending that hit me really hard. And this was MASH, and I think this particular one happened in the 70s.

It was a season finale. It wasn't a finale of the show, but it was a season finale — And they killed off a major character — And I don't think it's going to be any big spoiler because it's decades old. It was Colonel Blake, so Mlan Stevenson. He left the show and they killed his character off And.

The audience was shocked, because this is something that especially sitcoms did not do. But the actors were shocked too. Apparently, when they filmed it they didn't tell the actors, They didn't give him the final page of the script. So they filmed the whole video or the whole episode, just thinking that Henry Blake was flying home. And then they gave them the final scene and script and filmed it, and they were shocked too. What I found interesting was CBS and 20th Century both had to be convinced to allow this ending. They did not want it. They thought audiences wouldn't accept it And apparently viewers did write letters. Some of them were just saying how shocked they were. They couldn't believe the show went there.

Hey, the show is supposed to make me laugh, not cry. But the show was amazing and is well remembered today. And I think part of it is because they already spent multiple seasons establishing the characters. So to take a character, that was beloved not only by other characters in the show but by the fellow actors and by the audience and kill him was a big deal.

The Fallout ending is the same way. And I am on the record as saying I had nothing to do with it, That I thought Fallout was going to end. We were going to have a party. The player comes back in the vault, There's parties and a balloon and a cake, Bada, boom, You're done. And that is not what happened. Leonard Bareski had a different idea that he told me of saying: "I think the when the player's all done after the final big battle, whether it's killing the master or blowing up the military base, whichever one the player does last, when he goes back to the vault they don't open the door". And the overseer explains: they're never going to let him back in because he'd corrupt the vault. I had to be convinced of that. But guess what?

Here we are, you know, decades later, and I'm so glad we picked that ending because it is so good and it is so perfect and it fits the setting of Fallout so well that there are endings for things. Not everybody wins, In fact nobody really wins, It's just there's losers and people who lost le lost less. And that's such a good ending And it makes me realize It's good because it's powerful And it was also very, very hard to create. It was something I had to be convinced. I was the one that the buck stopped that and I had to be convinced. Same way the MASH episode it was. You know, CBS in 20th Century had to be convinced.

Endings like that are hard to create in any medium. I'm not going to. I'm not.

Trying to say TV shows and movies and books are easy, but games are especially hard, Especially the games I like making which are nonlinear. They have different stories. They possibly could have told why the player went through, depending on the what choices the player made. And because of that it makes it particularly hard to tell an ending, because what is the ending What? I have a video where I talk about canonical endings, because in nonlinear games where so many different endings are possible, usually have to pick a canonical one.

If you make a sequel, It's the one you kind of expect people will have, or it's the most popular one, or the one the most number of people have, or the ones that players making certain decisions are most likely to have. There's a whole video on canonical endings. But making a powerful ending for a, game that has so many different stories, you may have to have multiple endings, which just makes it even harder because you want them all to be possible. You want all possible stories to have all possible endings be as powerful as possible. And I'm sure one of your goals is tell a good story. And if you want to tell a good story, you're going to have to have a good ending And you can't just let this happen.

Um, it's not something that'll just pop out of your game. But I will say this: you don't have to decide when you start. I've talked about how you have to design your setting and then figure out your story and then do your system mechanics, but you don't necessarily need to pin down your ending at the very beginning. I do want you to craft it I don't want it to be something that just kind of happens: Oh, after you kill the final boss and slides roll. You do want some kind of ending that makes a statement and leaves the player with something powerful to consider. But you can let it organically flow. You've made your setting, You've made your story, You've made characters, As you're making the game, see what it is that players — whether they're on the team, QA, at publisher, anybody — see what it is they're really caring about. What are people talking about when they play your game?

What are the things that that really seem to resonate with them? And this is stuff that can adjust your game while you're going along. Maybe some side character you make slightly more important, or you give them a backstory, you attach a quest to them, something because players are really getting into that character. You can do all that, but then, when you make the ending, hit them. With something powerful, Make them finish the game and think about what they just did When those slides go past, make them wonder if they could have made a different decision, if things could be different, because they're responsible for a lot of what they see. In the ending, Unlike a TV show or a book or a movie, the player's responsible for what they're seeing. It wasn't some writer decided this character's going to die? You killed them or you got them killed or whatever. And I think you need to think about that.

If you're crafting a narrative game that has any kind of player agency at all, You're going to have to craft an ending that's powerful and hits the player hard and may them, may even make them want to replay the game because of it. Anyway, I just want you guys to think about endings, because I've been thinking. About endings, but now I'm going to go eat some cake.
