+++
title = "How To Gate Non-Linear Stories"
date = "2024-02-01"
id = "qm2qwgVwf1A"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Narrative Design", "Player Choice"]
summary = "I talk about methods to make sure that the player sees some story events before others, and why you should rarely do this."
references = ["2hDxie2Fnvo"]
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about how to gate nonlinear stories.

This comes from a question from Galaxy 5 production who asks: when you're programming a game, how do you make sure things happen in sequence according to a story, not only so that a, b and c happen before D, but also maybe events andf can happen at any time between events A and Z, or maybe, based on player decisions, events change, Etc. Interesting question I do have a video already on non-linear stories, but I didn't really talk about the gating stage or gating events, which does happen. Um, I'll give examples from Fallout and Arcanum as I go along. The just kind of explain those ideas and how it kind of changed, how I did things over time. But I want to make something clear and it's probably just the wording you chose: but this kind of gating happens at your design stage.

Do not leave this to programmers. You may mentioned in the question: when you're programming a game. I would not leave storyline gating to programmers. They may give you the tools to do it, but this is a d design task, specifically a narrative design task. So first off, let's assume you're at the very beginning of your game development. So you're doing your story development, which is step two. Remember I had three steps to making a game.

There was. Make your setting, make your story, make your system mechanics — there even alphabetical so it's easy to remember — setting story, system mechanics. So you're in step two. You've got your setting well defined, now you're working on your storyline and what you want to do first of all is try to make it so that your story has as few ordered steps as possible. So if the player needs to do a, b and c, let them do it in any order.

The original Fallout worked like this. We told you to go get the water chip and then you were supposed to discover that you had to destroy the mutant Army and kill the master. Turns out you could skip doing the water chip altogether. We didn't intend that. We did intend a to come first, but then you could do B and C in any order. But it turns out you could skip a and do either. Do B or C in either order. You could destroy the mutant Army, then the master, or the master and then the mutant Army, and then you're done.

Three steps. It's pretty minimal, but it worked, now, if you decide that there has to be an ordering — and we did do that in Arcanum and in The Outer Worlds usually it's the villain confrontation. You don't want to go straight to the villain and go: hey, it's me, I'm here to kill You usually want. It impossible to even encounter the villain without doing at least a few previous steps. Then, yes, you want to do some gating of your nonlinear story. This could be as simple as a key or an access code that you need to progress isn't available until a certain point, or that you have to gather some items together that are joined together, possibly crafted into a new item.

Um, I've played many games that have that. That you need to collect the 10 Jewels or the you know the three gemstones, or you have to talk to the five wise people and get information. This is common. It's a really common way to do it.

In fact, Arcanum had a very similar thing, where an — by the way, this whole thing is spoilers. These games are two decades old, so the AR Arcanum story can't be completed without you going to the void to take on the villain. Getting to the void requires a device. That device requires a chain of quests to be done, which requires meeting the NPCs that give those quests and getting those quests from them. Meaning you need to discover those NPCs in the first place, which means you need to learn, you need to discover the areas those NPCs are in.

It's this whole chain of things that have to be done, ultimately to lead up to the very last Act of the story. It doesn't feel like you're being forced into a linear path because you can go anywhere in the world you want, but ultimately to finish the story, you have to get the device, which means you have to do those quests from those Quest givers so effectively. What you need to do, even in a nonlinear story at certain stages, is you need to block access to an area, or to an NPC, or to a quest or to an item that is needed to advance the storyline.

Now I probably should digress here into essential NPCs. Essential NPCs are NPCs. You're literally not allowed to kill. Some games are riddled with essential NPCs and I understand why they did it is a very straightforward way to make sure the storyline can be Advanced. This person can't be killed because this person gives you a quest that advances the story, or gives you an item or gives you a piece of information. Personally, I hate essential NPCs.

Smack the player in the face with player agency. If I'm not allowed to kill, or at least try to kill, an NPC, why does your game have combat? What is special about this NPC? Now, if you make an NPC that is Immortal, so you're hitting on them and if they die, pop.

Right back, if it's part of the storyline, okay, it's still a little shady in my mind, but I'm like it's like Amnesia. I'll give that to you once, but you better not do that in every game you make. So there are a couple ways around. If ever you ended up a situation where you're like I just need to make this NPC essential, there are some ways around it. You can make them essential at first, either literally essential, like they're marked as unkillable, and then, once they give you whatever information you need, whatever it is, you need to advance the story line. Once they give it to you, can mark them as Essen, unessential, and now you can kill them. We did that in Fallout, sort of, with the overseer, he.

Actually you could fight him, you could attack him, but I don't think you could kill him. But at the end of the game, when he came out to tell you: hey, we're kicking you out, he isn't marked as essential anymore. So you can take out any frustration you have on the overseer at that point. Another thing you could do is the way they contact you. They're essential, but not in a way that's obvious, like maybe they send a fantasmal image if it's a fantasy game, or maybe they, you know, give you a hologram call if it's a Sci-Fi game. You can't kill them, but they're talking to you so you can interact with them. But another way to do it is to just say they're not essential and the information you would get from them. You always have a means to get a, backup. Usually this means they drop an item. Maybe, maybe you need a passphrase that you have to say to the mystical Guardian that opens. This giant Mountainside stone door.

There's no way you're going to break through it, so you need this pass phrase. Let's say there's an NPC who knows it. Normally he want you to do a bunch of quests or pay a lot of money or something. He has, something he wants you to do to get this pass phrase. So you kill him.

A lot of games, mine included, would have the pass phrase. He wrote down in a journal: great, now you have the pass phrase. However, it always feels like that's a short cut because you were supposed to do all these quests, all this storyline to get him to give you the pass phrase. So other ways we've done. It is in his journal. It just tells you where he found the pass phrase, like I found it from the Oracle at the bottom of the scuz blat. Dungeon, so you go off to the sklat dungeon, fight your way down to the bottom and the Oracle can tell you the past phrase. Of course there's always the problem of what if you kill the Oracle, or what if you've already done that dungeon and you killed the Oracle when you were there.

Yes, maybe you have to make. The Oracle is just a ball of gas, you know, a ball of light, so it can't really be killed. You could do that. You could also say that you can't.

For some reason the C black dungeon itself is unavailable unless the uh NPC is dead, like maybe he has a key to that dungeon and he has a note saying I found it in that dungeon. So if you kill him you now have this key. That'll let you go in the dungeon and have an alternate way of the passcode. So there's.

Always ways you can push a gating mechanism into the right location so it still feels like the player has agency, but they're still going to do things in a certain order that you predicted so that your story can unfold in a certain way. Now let me give you a big caveat with this: please only do this gating if you have to, if you need to, not just if you want to. And you should always look really, really hard at the story and say: do I have to do this? Because often it's just you want to but you don't need to, and you may think: well, the story unfolds better this way. But a story in a game is the story the player is telling to themselves. You can put in story elements, but the player is the one who should drive the story. If you're trying to drive the story so hard that you need multiple linear gated story points, maybe you should write a movie, maybe you should write a book, because you're trying to force a game to be something that it doesn't need. To be sure, there are linear games out there. I don't make them and I don't play a lot of them, so you're asking the wrong person. This is how I would make a nonlinear story with gating. Now, I've said this before.

Fallout had three acts: water chip, mutant Army, master Arcanum had 27. You know it started with find the boy and ended with kill kgen in the in the void or join him. Um, somewhere between three AXS and 27 AXS, I think, is the appropriate number of AXS for your game to have. They don't necessarily need to be linear, they just need to be distinct, and I think 27 for arcan was. A little too much, three for Fallout was a little too little. I think the truth is somewhere between those two extremes and if you're writing down your storyline, try to break it up into acts somewhere between 3 and 27, and then think about if those acts have to come in a certain order. They shouldn't need to.

In fact, in a really really good nonlinear game, the only, the final act, the, confrontation with the villain, probably needs to come at the end, and all the previous acts determine how that villain acts. To you, what, um tools you have at your disposal to deal with the villain? Maybe you can talk your way through him, maybe you don't even have to confront him. Maybe you can blow him up, um, something, you, have the code for the nuclear bomb under his base, something like that. You know what I'm talking. About.

I'm just saying: try to make your nonlinear story as nonlinear as possible and use any of these mechanisms I've talked about to gate it as infrequently as possible. Every time you use one think I guess I have to use this. But if you're saying that too frequently, you're no longer making a nonlinear game. So anyway, I hope this answers your question. Galaxy 5 production.
