+++
title = "My Games As Other Genres"
date = "2024-12-04"
id = "QxREx0QZmDs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design", "IP"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about modeling, constipation in role playing games e."
references = ["am52Ceuzgh8"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about modeling, constipation in role playing games e.

No, I'm not. Today I'm going to talk about realizing my games into other genres. This is something that I mentioned weeks ago in a video I made that was a postmortem of all my games combined together. It was called meta postmortem.

In the comment section of that video a lot of people mentioned that they wanted me to continue my thought on. I have a lot of ideas in my idea book about the IPS I've made, but making games with them that just weren't role playing games, CU, I got a little, I said, I felt a little pigeon hold into making role playing games, not that I don't like making them and I don't have fun making them, but some of my IPS I thought would work better in other genres or just as well, and even though I don't have any experience making them, I was like one day I wanted to have made them like that but I didn't. I even got a request from someone in the business saying, hey, keep going with that thought. So this video is me keeping going with that thought.

Let me put a big caveat on it, though. These are just ideas. These are not fully fleshed out, ready to go design specifications for games. They're just scribbles in a design Book on a shelf behind me where I said, huh, why don't I try something like this?

So let's start. I'll go over three of my IPS and for each one I give two or three ways. I wanted to express that IP in a different genre.

The first one was Fallout. After we made Fallout and I was thinking about making other games, one of the things I thought was: why don't we make a Fallout Style game? That's just combat, so I like Fallout as an RPG and I think it should have continued as an RPG, meaning good interactions with NPCs and all the non-combat ways of solving quests, like stealth and um dialogue and solving puzzles and all that. But it occurred to me that you could really double down on the combat elements and make a really really good FPS in the Fallout universe. Years later, when I played Borderlands, I was like, oh, just like this. It would have been very similar to this.

Can you imagine a Borderlands Style game set in the actual Fallout Universe where it's all about you running around doing Quest and the quest all involve going into places, killing things and grabbing stuff? In fact, Borderlands had some very fall outy elements to it I think you know what I'm talking about. But that was like one of the first things, I remember thinking, hey, wouldn't this IP be better? Or? Just as good?

Not as an RPG. The next one was: and for Fallout was: what if I kind of did the opposite? What if it was an adventure game and you got rid of all the combat? Or combat was so deadly that it would probably kill you. So it was mainly a game about exploration and puzzle solving, you know. So you were running around this world trying to find things and break into vaults and steal stuff, but there wasn't any combat. Or combat was the result of you failing to be successful in your other task and they almost it would pretty much result in you being killed. So I thought those were two interesting different ways of approaching Fallout: by basically pulling out the combat entirely as its own game, or pulling out the combat and throwing it away.

And then, with Arcanum, let's go on to my next IP, Arcanum. I was really, really into EverQuest when I was making Arcanum and I remember during arcan I wrote down several notes on this — would make a good MMO. This IP.

Not only do we have the Magic versus Tech, which adds tension, but there's all the different races with their factional disputes. You have elves and dwarves and gnomes and half works and all the different disputes going on there, which would make very interesting. When the player would take that race, they'd have a not only a different starting zone but a whole different political Outlook in front of them that they would have to deal with. There's also a bunch of different countries. We could have expanded it to the other countries and say: maybe you came from um kaledon or one of the other countries. That would have been interesting.

The one note I had: that I went into a huge detail on was newspapers, because there was a newspaper in Arcanum that reflected things the player did back at them because they became newsworthy stories, like they burned down a factory or they found some rare antiquity. I wanted to do that in Arcanum, the MMO, and I thought of it for two reasons. One, this is something to do when you have downtime. I said one of the reasons I stopped playing MMO was there was so much waiting around for all the group to show up. This is something to do while you're waiting around. You grab the newspaper, plus, it could contain a lot of information that I find a in a lot of MMOs. I have to go to external thirdparty sites to find like, what guilds are available on my server, what achievements have other players gotten on the server, what, are good items I got. To go somewhere else to find all that, and anytime I'm not in the game playing is, you know, a lack of concurrent users, which is a lot a measurement of a popularity of an MMO. So I wanted to have the newspaper have a lot of really interesting information in it, like bosses that were killed or rare drops that showed up, or achievements that other players had gotten that were really rare that would show up in the newspaper. Things that happened in the auction house, like a rare item went up for sale, or the a new record-breaking total, you know, gold sale was made.

Uh, talk about big damage being done, the biggest damage being done that week on the server, or the most kills, or a stats page of total kills of different creature types or classes, or what the most popular spell being cast was. There could also be news of upcoming events. You know, because a lot of MMOs do events now. There could also be rumors of sightings, like when, new content got put in, you just have rumors, like somebody saw a giant ogre in this Zone — cool stuff that you don't have to put on a load screen or a splash screen. That's actually there in the newspaper. I would also break the newspaper up into sections. There'd be a local section, which means just things happening on your server. Then there'd be a world section, which would be all the servers together, because remember Arcanum procedurally generated the world — uh, a lot of the external sectors. I wanted to dive in on that a little more, but that meant that, depending on what server you logged into, all the, all the handmade content would be the same, but the areas between it, either, whether it was dungeon connections or even exterior Zone connections, would be a little different on all the servers, slightly different monster population, slightly different terrain. That would be cool and therefore it' be fun to read about things coming in, news coming in from other servers. There'd be a guild section that would be about, maybe news about if you were in a guild. It'd be news about your guild, you know, kills your guild had done that week, um, upgrades your guild Hall, all kinds of cool stuff. But it would also have news about guilds that were available on your server, what kind of players they were, guilds that were recruiting, what kind of players they were looking to recruit. You know they may say we need tanks or we need more damage dealers, and then it might have details on different Guild Halls, maybe even a tour of the guild Halls, pictures or whatever.

There could be a financial page and that's where all the news of your server would be like the most money, all the total amount of money generated that week on the server, or maybe that day, vendor sales, auction sales — that's where all that stuff would go. And then there' also be a Housing section, a real estate, where we talk about housing and different neighborhoods that were in the game and which ones had real estate available for the player to purchase, maybe photos of really cool homes. Players could submit their home and go: I've decorated house really cool, I've got a lot of rare — uh, rare — items and trophies in there, and then it would put screenshots in a description and then there'd be even a description like: if you want to buy housing, here's how you do it, here's what level you have to be, here's who you go speak to, here's how much.

Money it tends to cost. Rather than put all that in Splash screens or uis that pop up, put it in the newspaper. What I love about this is the newspaper then becomes a go-to place for learning how to play the game and also getting the vibe of the game ESP, especially because achieve — you can see achievements from other players, which is aspirational for you.

I didn't even know this monster existed and that was the most powerful boss killed that week. You know, if you were off the server that day and it turns out some boss got pulled into a city and rampaged around.

There could be pictures of it, there could be notices of this. Vendor was killed and won't be, you know, so won't be on the server for 24 hours or something. That could be really fun stuff for people to read. Anyway, a lot of this is what I wanted in WildStar. Didn't get it — it was part of the design dock for that because I pulled it out of my notes for my Arcanum MMO.

So I have tried to do these. Didn't always, couldn't always do it.

My other idea for Arcanum was to turn it into a 4X game. You know, exploration, expansion, um, you know. For you know what a Forex game is. So the nice thing about it was you could pick a group you wanted to belong to and you grow their power, both their military power and their political power. I think Civ civilization set in the Arcanum world. But I love that.

There'd be magic and Tech trees to grow and that would be a fun thing to do. So I just remember that was like a single line I wrote In My Idea book somewhere and then finally we get to the outer. Worlds, which is my most recent IP, and I had written down three different ways. I wanted to make The Outer Worlds into a different game.

One of them was: I love star control. I wanted to make a star control style RPG where you have a spaceship and you go exploring the Galaxy. You go doing your skip jumps everywhere around the Galaxy, exploring what's going on, trying to find out if they're really aliens, trying to find out what's going on at the other colonies, you know, trying to learn the mysteries of this universe while playing a fun star control Style game that still has dialogue and you can make your ship better. That's the actual character in the game is the ship.

I wanted to do that. Conversely, um, I would have loved to have made a Starfield style RPG with um, The Outer Worlds, where it's multi — system. You can. Go to different systems. Uh, you can explore outside your ship, you can leave your ship, you can explore the, planet surface or the moon surface. You can have combat with people, you can have ship count combat, basically the whole kitten Kaboodle that Starfield had, but set in the The Outer Worlds IP. I think that could be a super fun game. And then, finally, I would love to have made a survival Style game in the in the The Outer Worlds's, world's, IP. We, kind of glossed over how um worlds, get terraformed, because some worlds were great and you could just send a colony immediately. Some were borderline and you had to send those big terraforming devices. Well, those early days of col, of colonization were probably rough, with, you know, local fauna running around, um trying to grow Earth crops.

It could be a very survival Style game. Similar to No Man's sky, but more constrained in the sense of you were going to places that had been recently discovered and trying to terraform them, trying to make Kickstarter Colony. You know, you and maybe a few other people. It could be multiplayer or not, I just remember writing this down going. Wouldn't it be fun to make no man Sky SL The Outer Worlds? Okay?

So I hope this is what people were expecting: these highlevel ideas of my games converted to other genres. That was my list that I could pull out of my idea book, some of them going back 25 years, some of them going back within the last couple years. So I hope you like that.
