+++
title = "Bosses"
date = "2023-11-09"
id = "RACW99lvJJg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Combat Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about bosses and not me, even though I'm a boss."
references = ["jWrrhj_uAT4"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about bosses and not me, even though I'm a boss.

Yo, I don't know why I did that. Um, Matthew bazin 6432 asks: I would like to hear more of your thoughts on bosses and other special NPCs. In other words, how have games handled and how could they handle these enemies in unique and interesting ways? I think I talked about this a little in a Q&A. I did um a few months ago, but you know what? Let's just do a whole video on it, because they're interesting. Bosses are interesting, they're interesting encounters. To me. Um, for me as a designer, a boss is a place where the designer is talking right to the player and going: okay, you think you've learned how to play, huh, well, bring it, because we're going to rumble generally. Now, it's interesting. I didn't plan to use used them in The Outer Worlds. In fact, I told Charlie staple is the lead designer. I I said I don't really.

Want to use bosses. We can have varying levels of encounters. I still want the roller coaster experience for that I talked about in the pacing video — but I didn't really want bosses per se. We did end up with some tougher encounters and we did end the game with a boss, but I'll talk about why we did that in a bit. Um, so let's talk. Talk about bosses in general, because bosses are a little different than regular Encounters in that they're always hand placed, or almost always. I can't think of a game that has a randomly appearing boss, um, and the boss themselves is are specially designed, and so is their environment, and because of that, even before you meet the boss, the designers should have telegraphed things to you.

Um, there should be warnings. NPCs alone should be like: oh, don't go in there, you know, there's a gorgon that will. Turn you to Stone, or don't go in there, you know there's something that breathes poisonous gas things for you to go, hm. I wonder if I have anything to defend against that kind of thing. Also, and I know you've all played a game where you walk into a room full of heal potions and ammo and you're like o and you can almost hear the designer going watch out, and the first thing you do is save. I've even had rooms like that, that auto saave. You walk into a room and it's autosave and you're like uhoh, I know something's about to go down.

That's something that's very boss encounter That You Don't See on other encounters. But the main thing I'm saying is, before bosses are even introduced to the player, there's all kinds of things that happen in the game for the player to learn about it, to learn. Like what kind of Boss it is, what might happen when you encounter this boss, so you can prepare and be ready for it. Um, bosses, more than anything, there are really there to test your medal, you know, have you figured out how to play this game? Because this is going to be a hard encounter and you don't want that to be a surprise. So for now, boss fights are usually fights.

Now we've gotten around that. I mean, Fallout had the encounter with the master, and this is a spoiler, but guess what? It's a 25-year old game, the master. You could literally talk out of fighting you, but you had to have done things before that, you couldn't just have a high speech skill. So, yes, some boss encounters aren't always, don't always end in fighting, but let's say, 99% of them do and let's talk about that. So the first thing you have to think about is how do you handle the non-combat PCS, because not every player is going to make a PC with all his points in comat combat skills.

So let's talk about the two major ways around that. Um, and actually three in The Outer Worlds. So your stealth character. There's all kinds of things you can do to help a stealth character survive a boss encounter, and one of them is have them use their stealth skills to prepare for the encounter. Maybe there's a room that is locked and when you go in they find some special equipment that will debuff the boss. Or maybe there's a lever that turns on Environmental hazards in the room the boss is in to, you know, to kind of reduce their hit points or something, that basically makes the encounter a little easier for the stealth player, and it's a tip. Of the hat that we know you haven't spent all your points in combat, but you did spend points in stealth. And how do we know that you're in this room? That required lockpick or um disarmed trap or um, you know, sneak, you needed something to get in here.

Similarly, with a dialogue based character, um, maybe there's a way in combat to debuff the boss, maybe there are dialogue skills that debuff them. Um, or maybe you can talk an NPC into coming with you because he's like a well-known, you know Gorgon Hunter, and you're like, hey, I'm going in to fight that Gorgon, why don't you come along? And they're like you have a high speech. Still, they're like, okay, and they come along. So now that helps you.

They're — they're not just a um — extra hit points and extra damage. If you're a dialogue character, you probably need that help and then for outter worlds, we had the leadership skill, which is: you're not necessarily good at talking, but you have lot You, your companions are better. That's what will help you in the boss encounter. Your companions can do their special attacks more frequently. They do more damage, um, whatever it is about your leadership skill that improved your companions will certainly come in handy in a boss fight. So those are all the things that happen before you ever encounter the boss. And that's something that's unique to a boss, because you know they're coming. The actual fight with the boss themselves. Many people think of bosses: oh, they have extra hit points, they have a lot of hit points and they have a lot of different attack modes. That's true, that's part of it, but I think there's a lot of ways to think about bosses Beyond just the boss, for example, the boss might have helpers. Then boss might have easier creatures that come along that also attack you. This is great for any of the uh players ability, player abilities that are AOE, because it's a chance to use them and it's a chance to wipe out these things. Often they are um part of a chain, so you do some sweep attack and take out a lot of the helpers. Then you do a Power Attack on the boss. Um, this that's a perfect example of abilities that need to power up uh. I've played games where every time you kill something it goes into a bar that powers some big ability. So what you do is when you a strategy, when you ENC a boss, is to quickly kill all the little helper creatures, which Powers up your big Mega ability that then you then use on the boss. Also, some games when they recognize that there are builds that aren't combat oriented, will let you convert those helpers over to you. Maybe you mind control them, maybe you convince them they're fighting on the wrong side, whatever you want to do, and suddenly some of those helper, some of those helpers for the boss, turn into helpers for you and they turn on their boss.

That's always super fun and it's memorable and it uses something your player is made for. Um, the big thing I mentioned in the Q&A video was bosses should usually go through stages and that's something that doesn't happen in normal encounters. It happens in Boss encounters where the boss, as they go through different stages — and I know in World of Warcraft they even tell you this — they sometimes in like stage two. You know the boss May physically change. He certainly gains new abilities or movement mode. Suddenly maybe he's flying, so so you have to attack him with ranged, or maybe he suddenly gets a AOE attack weapon. You know he suddenly can breathe gas or breathe fire. These are all different stages that bosses go through, that keep the player on their toes and makes them adapt. That you can't come in with your one ability and use it, because the boss is going to go through stages in Temple of Elemental Evil again. This is going to be spoilers for a 22-year-old game. Um Zug Moy at some point would offer to surrender and, depending on your alignment and what you've done previously in the game and what your speech skills are, you can manipulate that. You can either say no and keep fighting, or you can surrender to zugg moy, or you can have zmy surrender to you and become a follower of yours.

It's a really cool way, I think, of handling. A boss in a way that you rarely see. That it's like you come out of a boss room with the boss and the boss works for you. We couldn't handle that unfor, fortunately in Temple, so that was handled in cut scenes and end slides. But those are the kind of bosses that are super memorable.

Everyone's killed the dragon. How many people come out, came out of that mountain riding the dragon and having a new Mount which is the name Dragon.

That's cool and that's something you can see. You can if you haven't seen.

That's something people should do, also because bosses tend to be placed. Like I said, I don't think of a lot of randomly encountered bosses. The room itself can go through stages and that's something I've seen in different games, where the room itself changes over time. Maybe there are hazards, maybe they're not there and they start up, or maybe they're there but they move. Maybe they're there and they change type. They go from being electrical to acid, and that's again something to keep the player on their toes, to make them have to adapt to that new change. Also, sometimes blockers appear, like columns will rise up or Shields will appear and you have to deal with it. You have to get them, knock them down, or you have to move position, or you just have to change your tactics. Also, paths to things that can help you or hurt the boss can suddenly appear. Maybe all of a sudden these columns shoot up and at the top of them are levers that can spray acid on the boss.

But you have to double jump to get there. Players who never took double jump are like I guess I just keep fighting the boss, but all the double jump.

Players are like, woohoo, I'm spraying acid. That's cool.

Um, and then I already kind of touched on it with you leaving with the boss. There's a lot of things that make boss encounters memorable that happen after you're done. They're post boss things because people want some kind of change Beyond just a base reward, like here's a plus one sword and here's a bunch of coins or something. They want something.

That's like: I took on a boss, maybe it's a reputation, maybe you're known as the Gorgon Slayer. And now there's a new greeting people have when you walk around the world. That's really cool, maybe you get a special item from them that gets reactions from people in um, in Arcanum, we had armor that made people do a special greeting and they could tag the armor. The armor basically looked so scary that you would get a different uh.

Greeting out of people you meet in towns. That would We really wanted that. We put that in planning to use it on Boss encounters. There might even be a world State change. Maybe this entire Zone was foggy or stormy and then when you kill the boss and come out, it's not that way anymore and people are going: yay, go you and or, like I said, you know, the only way to get a named dragon mount is to go kill a boss dragon, or almost kill, and then they surrender and they become your, Mount. These are all things that a boss can provide. That is really especially cool because it's a boss.

It wasn't just something that randomly dropped. It's something that you win in with the intention of getting and once you get, people know what you did, so it kind of changes the world State. That's something that's. Really cool and special and unique — almost unique — eh, let's not say unique.

It's something that's very associated with bosses. So that's my idea on bosses, um the pre, during and post boss experience, and why I think those are different than regular encounters, and how I think you can step up your boss game by including more of these things in your boss design. So I hope that helped Matthew.
