+++
title = "Playing My Older Games"
date = "2023-11-21"
id = "rHSlfFuIuls"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Retrospective"]
summary = "I played my first four RPGs (Fallout, Arcanum, The Temple of Elemental Evil, and Vampire: Bloodlines) and give my thoughts about experiencing them now, decades later."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about playing my older games.

There have been several suggestions people have had. They want to have me play some of my older games and stream it, or just stream.

In general, I'm not really interested in that. I mean, it's not my thing. I don't want that to be the Channel's focus, and I also think there's a bunch of much better people out there who stream themselves playing games.

Um, the same way, I don't. I mean, I've talked to some people I've worked with before, but I don't really want this to turn into an interview Channel I. I brought them on because I was talking about things that I I thought they could add a lot to the conversation about what I wanted to explore — things about Fallout, um, because even though that's very popular, fallout's popular. I don't have as many notes on that as I do say on most of the stuff I have at tra, so what I did do, though, is I went and played four of my early games. I played Fallout, Arcanum, Temple of Elemental Evil and vampire — the Masquerade bloodlines first. I want to say, um, some people are going: oh good, those are your, first four games.

No, I made. My first game was Grand Slam bridge, then I made bar tail construction set, then I made Rags to Riches, but these are my first four RPGs, so they're the first four games that kicked off my long career in making role playing games. But the first thing I realized when I was playing these is I owe a lot of thanks to Microsoft that these games were even still playable. Microsoft has done a lot to make sure that backward compatibility exists in Windows, and where it does doesn't exist, It's fairly easy to like force a game to play, even if you just download something like dosbox and you can play DOS games in it. Now you may think: well, this is easy, try doing that on a Mac. There's a Fallout Mac, but I doubt if you're going to be able to play it on Modern uh Apple Hardware, because Apple simply doesn't care about that kind of stuff. Um fact, the people I know who play Fallout on M modern Apple Hardware are playing the windows uh fallout in a Windows emulator on their Mac. So thanks Microsoft.

Um, so let me talk about some things. That kind of hit struck me as I played through these games. I didn't finish all of them. Um, what I did is I went in, made a character, played um some side quests, played along some of the main story Quest. Just it brought back a lot of memories about making the game. But what I really want to talk to you about is my reaction to them as games being played in modern times.

Probably the first thing that hit me is, wow, these resolutions are low. I mean, they're not even as low as my first games were, 32200, which on a on the monitor I'm playing on, which is a 1920x 1080 monitor, 32200 is six times less wide and five and a half times less tall: 5.4 for people who are following along with their calculators. Um, even my 640480 games, you know they stretch and expand on my on a modern monitor. But there is something else that's at play here and this is something that's: there's a very big difference between how a CRT monitor, cathode ray tube Monitor and an LCD monitor display things. When crt's display pixels, as you know, it's where the ray hit the phosphor tube and excited it to Glow in a particular color, in a particular shade. Of color.

That's very similar to Splat techniques, if you're like gaen splatting and how to create a 3D scene, you know that's a whole other talk, but just trust me, there's. There's something called splatting, which is very similar to how even a CRT even displays, compared to an LCD, which has a grid of pixels divided into sub pixels, which are, you know, green, red and blue, and these light up as determined by what pixels you're trying to draw. But those are in isolated little cells, so there's a minute little grid and those pixels never cross it. Where CRTs are, like Splat, Splat of pixels. So there's Splat of pixels. So there's this automatic aliasing that's happening, um, or anti-aliasing, you're. You're seeing basically a smear of pixels and not a grid of pixels, and that really does make the older games look different.

Fallout on a CRT. Looks different than Fallout on an LCD. So there was that kind of thing. I, in addition to my memory, I always remember things in a higher resolution than I'm seeing them.

There was that that was a big thing. I was like all of these games made me go, uh, we really didn't have much resolution. I mean, even vampire, um the, you could sometimes see things. You know well that we could have used a few more Poes there or high resolution texture or some normal Maps or some better lighting.

But anyway, the other thing that tended to — Second Bigg thing that tended to hit me when I'm playing my old games are: why did I do that? I often was playing because. As I got older and my design philosophy matured, I found myself often thinking: well, you design something because you're the designer trying to get the player. To play a certain way and your design should lead you along that path. Sometimes I'm playing my OU games and I'm like: why did I want them to do this? Why did I want them to walk along this path?

A perfect example of that was in Temple, in character creation, where it hits you with party alignment which is nothing from D and D. It's like, hey, you have to pick a party alignment to make sure all your characters are within one step of the global party alignment for your character. And I do have my notes on that. And I did it because, well, I did it to solve a problem in Temple, where you could have anyone be the speaker by reordering your party. You could have anyone be the speaker for the group and if you let all the different alignments in, it was very easy to have the good. Guys speak to the Paladin and the bad guys speak to the evil Temple people and it felt wrong to let one group have Co like cover all the bases that way.

Plus, I remember doing party alignment in my high school D andd group and sure enough, my notes are there saying Yep, this is a good solution. The reason I did it in my D and D group is when we first started playing we had weird groups with like paladins and assassins and it felt weird. It's like the palad would never have tolerated the Assassin in the group. It just made sense to add something like party alignment to govern creation of parties. I'm actually surprised that number comes up in D and D. I think they just leave it to the DM and the players to work out why this particular group is together.

The third thing I noticed: when playing my game is probably the most common thing that kept hitting me and kept me go uh, and that was UI. I did a UI video where I talked about. In the early days we didn't even really think about UI. UI was something we just threw on like, oh, we've designed inventory or we've designed an option screen and we quickly threw together a UI to let you access it. We didn't think about accessibility at all, but we also didn't think about: does it make sense?

Is it something? When people first are, um experiencing it? Do they know immediately what they're supposed to do? Because we interacted with that every day, multiple times a day, for years, of course we understood what it is.

The biggest problem with my older games is a lot of the UI feels very clunky to me and um Fallout was very much that way. Um, Arcanum feels that way to me too. I think Temple's better. I really still like the um, the radio menu, but if you're constantly throwing the same spell it does feel weird to be like: okay, bring up you know, abilities, spells, Magic user, first level magic Missile. Every single time I wish we had done hotkey bars, uh, in that game. So, aside from UI, the other thing that surprised me the most — and this is my fourth and final one — there was a lot of content in my older games that I literally didn't remember was there? Um, now, yeah, one part of that is I've forgotten about it I mean, Fallout was made 26 years ago now and Arcanum is came out 22 years ago. It's, these are old games and I just don't remember this content, but a big chunk of it, and people have to remember I didn't make it.

Um, the only the only dialogues I wrote were in Temple and the only quests I did the whole implementation of were in Temple. There were a lot of ideas that I made, a lot of quest ideas that went of mine that went into Arcana but someone else implemented them. And in Fallout I approved of almost everything that went in but I I didn't do a lot of it. So a lot of it was stuff that was like somebody came by and said, hey, I'm going to put in a quest to do this.

I'm like, sounds good. I may never have played it, there was there. I was wearing too many hats and too busy to have played all of fallouts content before it shipped. Um, I played a lot of Arcanum but Arcanum had so much content I would like to say I played all of The Outer Worlds's content and I think I played almost all of it, but even then, I think I played it 16 times, maybe more, but there are there's so much dialogue, and there's so much dialogue that's locked behind skills or perks or previous actions in the game that I'm sure that there are dialogue nodes that I've never seen, either because they weren't available to the character I was making, I was playing or the choices I made on that um player. I never picked that option, so, yeah, there's some content in my older games, and I'm like I literally do not remember this um. Part of it, though, is um, because I didn't make it and I didn't experience it was fun to see it for the first time and it made me laugh, which was a really good rule of thumb. In a lot of my games, people put things in deliberately to try to make me laugh.

Um, I still remember whenever I say that I hear, most recently our writer, uh natai on The Outer Worlds, who said whenever he was stuck writing dumb dialogue, he just think to himself what would Tim say. But it always made me laugh, so, playing through these older games — Fallout, Arcanum, Temple, ENT, to evil and vampire Bloodlines — there were places in it that I was literally laughing out loud. I love the content. In many cases I could kind of remember who did it and I was like, oh, I almost hear it in their voice or them coming in to tell me, hey, I just put this in and sometimes, like I said, it was brand new to me and I just loved it and enjoyed it. So that's me playing my older games.

The biggest things I got out of it was: you know, wow, they're low resolution. Uh, wow, I don't know why I did that. Oh yeah, there it is in my notes.

Wow, the UI is clunky, and wow, there's a lot of content in here I don't remember ever having been put in. So it's fun to go back and play them. And you know, with places like Gog, good old games and steam having these older games, with rappers and making them playable, you might want to play them too. I don't make any money off of it, but knock yourself out if you want to play these older games.

I think they're still fun. I think they hold up today. They're just a little clunky.
