+++
title = "Game Developer Stage Limitations"
date = "2025-10-06"
id = "rm9dT6BgL_Y"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Production", "Careers"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about game developer stage limitations, which is a somewhat complicated talk."
references = ["v6a-neSq0VA", "DEnlUqYkMTk", "IADSh_P05As"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about game developer stage limitations, which is a somewhat complicated talk.

And yes, it's dark because in Seattle, once summer ends, it starts getting darker earlier in the evening and it stays dark later in the morning And I get up around. You know, I'm up at this desk by 600..

Sun's not coming up for another half hour. I'm not waiting for it. This topic on the limitations by game production stage is complicated. It wasn't something I would have talked about a year or two ago because I had to lay a whole foundation. So I'm going to reference videos while I talk, Recommend you watch the ones I referenced, or at least have watched them, because I'm not going to redefine terms and get lost in talking about game development roles. But first I do want to talk about what I'm not talking about here, because I've had. I've talked about limitations before. I've talked about my own limitations. Um, I have.

A whole video about what I'm bad at. I've talked about dialogue, learning that I wasn't good at writing dialogue after thinking I was great at writing um after the Fallout narrative, uh, monologue, the opening of the cinematic. But there's another one I'm not good at, which is: um, I'm not good at actually wrapping up a project. It's that's the stage where I lean most heavily on other people, and particularly production, to make sure that all the loose ends get wrapped up, that everything is completed, every map is done, every item is in, that localization is being done, that basically everything's getting tied up and ready for a shipping product. So go watch that video on what I'm bad at.

I'll link it below Specifically. I know this because the first project I was ever in charge of was Fallout and I needed help at the end. That was a good example, of we worked on it for three years and we put together a really good game and then I discovered there was a whole map that wasn't done. There were items missing, there were quests unfinished, there were quests not even started. And I remember I went to talk to Fergus about it and not only did he pull some people from other projects to help us finish, but he rolled up this his sleeves himself and did work like low-level work, making quests and items to get the game finished. Um, I have worked with two people — people, in my career — who are awesome at getting games across the finish line, and it's something I watched because I'm not that good at it. They were both good at tying up all those loose ends. Uh, one is a producer I've worked with for years and the other was one of the founders at Obsidian. And I would consider wrapping up a game to be art.

It's: less science, It's a lot of attention to detail, It's a lot of management, It's a lot of it's going by as much by timelines as by feel, Um, but that's not what I'm talking about here. Um, I also want to make it clear that I'm not talking about game developer roles. I have a whole video on game developer roles. In the modern game development industry, people are very much thrown into a role and expected to do just that. And, of course, in some ways, that's to be expected.

I've worked with programmers who are bad at art. Uh, I've worked with artists who are really bad at writing, but that's okay because they're good at what they were hired to do. Now I've seen exceptions to both of those. I've worked with a programmer who could do really good.

Art. I've worked with multiple artists who were exceptional designers, many of whom switched their career from art to narrative design because they were so good at it. But those were exceptions, and even those exceptions were bad at what I'm about to talk about, which is this: Um games go through production stages. I have a video on that. Link it below, Not going to define my terms here.

Basically, in a nutshell, they start with brainstorming, They go through concept and prototype and they end up with testing and shipping. But there's other phases in there And here's the. I think the first time in my in this channel, you're going to see me make an absolute statement.

I'm not going to see say many game developers. I'm not going to say most game developers. I'm going to say every single game developer that I've worked with in four and a half decades has not been good at all of those game production stages.

And just so you know I'm including myself on that. Um, like I said, when you get towards the end, I really need production help to make sure that every loose end is accounted for before the game is shipped. Especially, you know, localization and other outsourced things are just hard to stay on top of. I rely on production for that. But, when I say I've never seen anyone good at this I'm talking about. I've worked with people who were phenomenally good at most things and then we w then in a certain stage of the game, I would just see it fall apart. I worked with an artist who was fan freakingtastic. He was amazing at concept and execution. So you know he could sketch up something. And what do you think of this? And then he'd put it together in 2D or 3D art packages and it would be phenomenal.

Wasn't a brainstorming session with him? It did not go well. He had an idea for a game and everything he described was visual. And I'm sitting there thinking I wonder what the core game loop is. So I just asked him what I thought was a perfectly reasonable question to ask in a brainstorming session about a new IP. Which is that sounds like it looks amazing, what does the player do?

And not only could he not answer, he got mad at me for asking, like really angry, which made me go. This person should not be in a brainstorming session If you can't answer a game brainstorming question of what does the player do in this game you're suggesting. You should not be suggesting a game.

Uh, similarly, I worked with a programmer. Who was so good at the prototype and basically, you know, making the, base game, and even like the, horizontal slice, and all of that. He was so good, He was so fast, It was amazing. And then we got to the end when things had to be optimized and he just couldn't do it. He seemed confused about the fact that code had to be finished and shipped and almost always someone else had to step in to finish his code and get it optimized. So it wasn't just the optimization, it was getting it done, getting that last 10% done, Just couldn't do it.

Now, the problem — the reason this is a problem — is the modern industry treats game developers as being good at every one of those stages. You were usually put on the game if you weren't in the brainstorming session. You're put it on right when it. Enters production and you're expected to stay there through ship.

And guess what I just said, not everybody's good at all. That, and that means that every single one of those developers you're going to hit a production stage that their contribution is just not good.

I'm not talking at zero, I'm talking it hurts that stage. Now there's one exception to this that I've seen, which is concept artists usually get artists. Concept artists usually get brought in if they're — I mean, I've seen some that are really good at brainstorming — but they're always brought in at the early stage where you're trying to decide what your art style is, how your levels may be laid out, what vistas will look like, and the concept artists draw these things up and you pick, you talk about, you know, touchstones from movies and TV shows and other games, and the concept artists put various things. Together and you hone in on what your art style is going to be.

Many of them are also included in production because they're really good at making the 2D art that goes into the game, Whether it's art for the user interface, like buttons or framing, or the items in the inventory screen — not the 3D items, but 2D, although a lot of times they just take a 2D, they take the model and make a 2D render. But they also are really good at making in-game textures for things that are two-dimensional, like computer screens inside the game or posters that are on walls or artwork that are on walls. Frequently the concept artist will do that. Loading screens are another good one, but for the most part outside of that, where you know: hey, these concept artists were good concept, these concept artists were good during production as well. People are usually good at some of the stages and not others. And one of the things I know — I don't talk about indie development, especially because I've never really done it, but I think this is the one of the reasons that a lot of solo indie dev fails — is I've never met someone who's good at every single one of those stages. And when you're a solo developer, you have to be good at all of them.

And if you're not, my guess is that's where it's going to fail. You know, if you have a great idea but you can't get the mechanics done right, or you can't get the art in that you think matches what you're making, or you can't get the game optimized well, if you can't outsource that either, or you're not good at managing outsourcing, you're going to have a problem with the game. And I think this is true, for publishers too. I've worked with enough publishers to say that, as the game goes through all of its stages, I've never worked with a publisher who's good at every one of those stages.

Some of them are great at the beginning, whether it's they just really good at making good contracts or very clear on what they're going to cover, or they're good at helping you spin up. They're good at um, asking you questions to make you tease out the vague areas of your design doc.

But then later things get not so good. Either maybe they don't market well, or maybe they were responsible for QA and they just do a piss poor job of it. This has always been the case. I've never seen a publisher handle every single stage really well.

Now, I hate being critical without coming up with a solution. So I said, "Okay, I'm going to try to. End this with a solution", but unfortunately for solo developers and for very small um developers, small organizations — I don't see a solution, because if you only have a few people and there's some stage that none of them are good at, I don't know what you can do. But for mid-tier and large organizations — organizations, - I wish that developers who work there could be identified not only by their role but what stage they're good at. Like this is a programmer who's great at rapid prototyping, but you don't want them at the end of the game when things need to be optimized. Or here's a, an artist that you want to include in brainstorming, but these you don't, because I think that would be great to allow you to move people on and off the project as it progresses, so that they don't have to go through those stages that they're not very. Good at, and this can work in a mid-tier or larger organization because there's always multiple games being made at once in various stages of development. So if you have concept artists at the very beginning, when you're doing your planning and your art style design, they can move off to the next game. Most of them can move on to the next game and do the planning on that. Some of them can stay to do some of that 2D art that I mentioned needs to be done. Or if you have what I like to call the completionists, get them in your vertical slice to make that look like the final stage that you're going to ship with. Or get them in the final stages of testing and optimization, uh. Or content completion, where you discover this map isn't finished or we don't have enough items to populate the economy correctly.

Get them involved. In those stages, because the completionists will do really well there. And I think this all comes down to the problem.

It's called fungeibility, where game developers are often seen as fungeible, meaning they can be socketed in and put and you can replace any one with any other one, like a programmer can be replaced with a programmer or, you know, an artist can be replaced with an artist, and everybody knows that's not true. But I've seen a lot of companies treat employees as funible And on the employee side I've seen a lot of employees think of themselves as fungeible, especially in terms of stages. They think, "Put me on at brainstorming and I'll be on through. You know, testing and optimization, and they're just not good at all those stages". So that's what I kind of want to end up with is if you think employees are funible or you think you're. A funible employee, you aren't, and if your company is big enough, I do recommend looking at game developers not only by their role, but by what stages they're they really excel at, and letting them work in those stages and not expecting them to be wonderful and highly efficient and motivated and passionate about every single stage of game development, because I've never met anybody who is. Anyway, that's what I want to talk about today.
