+++
title = "Game Development Tunnel Vision"
date = "2024-07-22"
id = "RXVydxNRDAk"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers", "Real Life", "Game Development"]
summary = "Sal SE, Tim, par gotcha. I bet you right now some of you are reaching for that YouTube translate button and some of you were thinking, whoa, Tim's French accent is terrible, trust me, that's been said. No, I'm doing this video about game development, tunnel vision, because it's one of the things that occurred to me. I get a lot of questions about a lot of things and early on, when there were less of you, I would answer and say, oh, that's not something I know or I can't talk about it I did do a video on things I can't or won't answer, but since then there's been a lot more questions that Encompass a lot more things, even about game development or tangentially related game development, that I literally cannot answer. I either don't know it or I'm not qualified to answer."
references = ["6TtR8YjmdnA", "d3Udo6XjMhY"]
+++

Sal SE, Tim, par gotcha. I bet you right now some of you are reaching for that YouTube translate button and some of you were thinking, whoa, Tim's French accent is terrible, trust me, that's been said. No, I'm doing this video about game development, tunnel vision, because it's one of the things that occurred to me. I get a lot of questions about a lot of things and early on, when there were less of you, I would answer and say, oh, that's not something I know or I can't talk about it I did do a video on things I can't or won't answer, but since then there's been a lot more questions that Encompass a lot more things, even about game development or tangentially related game development, that I literally cannot answer. I either don't know it or I'm not qualified to answer.

Um, so let me summarize just. I mentioned this in my career video. I've never done anything else. I've been doing game development since I was 16 years old, professionally, like getting paid to do it, um, so, other than being in school — and I did get paid in grad school to teach and research programming issue — well, I taught programming and I researched AI — other than that, I've never been paid to do anything else in my entire life other than be a Game Dev. One exception, you could say, was in 2005 when I helped someone with a theme park design.

Um, that's also in the career video, but I I really have never done anything else, so this creates this form of tunnel vision in my, in my life and also you need to realize that's true for this, channel as well. I have a lot of game development stories. As you can tell, I've been talking daily, near daily, for over a year just about game development, but I lack a certain foundational set of experiences that almost all of PE — the people watching this video — have. You have worked a number of jobs, especially when you're a teenager. You know, while all my friends were getting jobs at department stores and fast food restaurants and you know little stores like shoe stores and pet stores, or working with a landscaping company, or, you know, doing internships at different companies, I wasn't. I was literally leaving school early to go to my game job.

In fact, I had, uh, I was. I went through three years of French in high school, tested out of French 4 and had started French 5, and I quit it because I I wanted to have a little more time to be at work. I mean, some of you are might going: wow, you're such a workolic. To me, in late High School, my Junior and Senior year, what I was doing at work was way more interesting to me than anything I was learning in high school. I was learning about operating systems and programming, languages and techniques and how the game industry worked, and to me that was fascinating and that went way beyond anything I was getting at school. However, you have to realize that this created this weird tunnel vision in me.

I've never dealt with the public. I've said to friends of mine, maybe now that I'm semi-retired, maybe I should go get a retail job, and they're like: no, don't do it. Um, I've never, ever in my life worked with physical product. Whenever we finished our game it was sent off to duplicators and printers and you know CD manufacturers. So I've never worked with physical product the way a lot of you have at jobs where you did stocking, where you managed inventory, where you checked people out at you know cash registers.

I've never, ever. Done that, and I've also done no form of physical labor. I've never done any job except sitting in front of a computer. So it leads to this weird point of view, this weird lens I have on everything like I know the thermodynamic equations behind how internal combustion engines work, but I can't fix my own car.

That's that's what I'm trying to express here, and that's why there's a lot of questions that I don't even touch anymore. I, it's. It seems repetitive to go: I don't know anything about that. I can't answer that. Um, that's not in my area of expertise.

And just to put a pin in it. You know, you, I ran troa games with Leonard Bari and Jason Anderson for 7 years, from 1998 to 2005, and this is just me talking.

I'm not going to speak for them, but I had no training at all in running a business — business development. I had one accounting class from high school.

Troa was run to make games, not to make money. Now some of you are going, great, that's what a game company should do, focus on making games. Others of you right now are going, duh. I can totally tell from the games you made that that was your focus. We had three games by various groups of people considered cult classics: Arcanum, Temple of Elemental Evil and vampire Bloodlines. But all of them had bugs, design issues like major flaws and beyond that. I'm talking beyond the actual making games.

Tro itself had a flaw because businesses need to make money. They need to. I know people don't like to think about that and they're like: oh, businesses, They use that as a negative thing. Businesses are just trying to make money.

Duh, that's. What they do That's why they're formed, if they don't make money, everyone who works there loses. And that's what happened to troa. We were not focused on making money, we didn't make good contracts, we didn't focus on Business Development, we didn't focus on business relations or anything like that. Tro got shut down by us. Um, and it was my idea to shut it down. If you want to blame someone, it was my idea because it just was not being run as a good business. We were running it to make good games. It's. It sounds like hey, good.

No, it was bad for Troy, it was bad for the employees because we couldn't keep going as a concern. So the reason I made this video aside so you could hear dog snoring again is, if you're watching my channel, you have to realize that there's a lot that. I there's some things I won't talk about — ndas current games I'm working on, but there's also a lot I can't talk about. I just have no experience, including game development.

So when people ask questions about indie or if I say something and there's a lot of comments of people going: well, Tim, that's not how it works in Indie. You're right, I don't know anything about Indie and I don't pretend to. Similarly, I can't talk to you about venture capital. I know a lot of colleagues who've gotten their game companies off the ground or gotten games funded through Venture Capital — VC.

I don't know anything about that. I've never done that.

I don't know what life is like at Big Publishers. I think really big Publishers like EA or Ubisoft or Sony, my, the closest I ever got to that was working at obsidian that got bought by Microsoft. And then I left. I mean you might think ncys soft, but I worked at a little teeny division carbine, where there was a bigger home office in Austin which I didn't work at and an even bigger office in Soul, South Korea, which I didn't work at. So I don't know how things go there internally.

People ask questions about engine. People have asked me about gdau. I don't know anything about that. I know about unity and unreal and even then I didn't work in any other engine except the one uh Source engine from valve until I made Bloodlines, which came out in 2004, and that was 23 years into my career. So there's so many things I don't know about other game engines. Additionally, people ask about programming languages and you have done assembly, but back in the 8086, 8080, 8088 days, pretty much any language you're going to ask. Me about besides C, C++ or C, I don't know much about.

I've studied them academically. I know Fortran and snowball and you know, but Ada, things I haven't looked at in decades and you know I've done a little on Python and pearl, but not much, and my, deep knowledge of the sea languages got me through that. So I wanted to do this quick video basically saying: hey guys, there's a lot I don't know. So I need you to add that to the, growing list of lenses through which you watch my channel and just know that you can ask me questions about things, but I don't. I don't know how to answer them. So I try and I, if it's a short answer, I'll respond to your comment. If it's a longer answer, I'll make a video, but there's just a lot of things I don't know anything about. And, um, for all you native French speakers, I apologize for how I opened this video.
