+++
title = "Questions To WotC About ToEE"
date = "2025-10-31"
id = "S1efStek__o"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Temple of Elemental Evil", "Dungeons & Dragons"]
summary = "These are questions I asked Wizards of the Coast about the Temple of Elemental Evil module, when I was making the video game version back in the early 2000s."
references = ["lb6agFgh11E", "q8T255IglJw"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to share with you questions I sent to Wizards of the Coast about Temple of Elemental Evil.

This is a fun Friday, so this is not super serious, but it is important, I think, to dive into. Uh, let me tell you why I'm doing this. I've been looking for the test plan that I made for Tempo of Elemental Evil that I sent to Atari QA. I was planning to do a video on that. I'm still planning to do a video on that, but I can't find the test plan And I know I wrote one.

The thing is I think I wrote it as an email and not as a document that I attached to an email. And my email archive from Troa is incomplete. And the reason for that is I backed up my machine or machines — I had three or four during the run of Troka — But any emails that were stored on our Outlook server I don't have. I only have the ones that were stored locally on my machine because I backed up my machine.

Anyway, that test plan is missing, however, I found a list of questions that I sent Watsi when we were well into the development of Temple. It was dated September 10th 2002., so we are well into development. We're — uh, over a year, I think, into development and we have another year to go, almost another year.

What I like about these, and why I'm sharing them, is they illustrate the difficulties of con converting a paper and pencil module into a computer game. Because you can't have questions lingering You. Every question you have about the module has to be answered, or you just don't put that thing into the computer game. Computers can't wing it, when, um, anyone ever says "Well, this is at DM's discretion", You have to decide right then what your discretion is. The computer has to know You have to put in a rule for it, You have to put in a dialogue line for it. You have to put in a creature who responds a certain way. You can't wing it, so I came up with a lot of these, but then I told the team and they sent me some too.

We broke it up into questions about third edition specifically, and then questions about Temple of Elemental Evil, the module specifically. Plus, we threw a few funny ones at the end that were just like "This came up and we they're wacky, but we don't know what to do with them". Bear in mind, Watsi didn't answer all of them. Luckily I got to ask Gary Gyax. Later I had a phone call with them, about a 45minute phone call. I talk about it in my videos.

Uh, fun, the fun of Tempo of Elemental Evil and Brushes with Famous People. I will link those below. I can just say that that 45minute discussion with Gary Gyax was not only phenomenal but way more illuminating than these things. But anyway, let's dive right into it I will read you what was sent. It's titled: Questions for Watsi, September 10th 2002..

Our work on the Elemental Evil module and the all new third edition rules have raised questions. Some of these questions are specific to the module, while others are more general system questions. Many of the questions seem very detailed, even nitpicky, but I need them answered in order to know how to proceed with art or dialogue or game plot. Most of these questions arose during programming of the rules, where an exact specification is required. Let's start with third edition rules.

Questions One: we cannot implement every prestige class in the DMG and the class guide supplements like to of blood masters of the. Wild, etc, but we do plan to add such classes to the game. Are there any prestige classes that you consider high priority? Which one should we include first before any others? Their answer was: do the dungeon masters guide prestige classes first, especially the good and neutral ones, then any of the any in the class books.

Try for a spread of all classes or alignments. Question two: should we make feats and abilities that are available to classes that can buy them but do not benefit from doing so? Examples would be sorcerers buying the quicken spell metamagic feat or rangers picking undead as their favorite enemy. Computer gamers get upset when they're allowed to buy useless abilities and it is common for interfaces to disallow such purchases.

Their answer was: our choice, but if it's useful to some class, then put it in. Question three: Similarly, some skills are being included in the. Computer game, but in a limited fashion and only to benefit one or two classes. An example is the perform skill, which is being included only as a prerequisite for bic music abilities. Should such a skill be available to other classes, even though the skill would never be called upon in the game? Answer our choice, but if useful to some class, then put it in Question four: Should we allow a player to create a multiclass character at the start of the game as two level zero classes? There is a variant in the DMG and, while possible, this feature will entail extra work and spread around a lot of code modules and is almost too late to include it. In other words, for us to judge the bang for the buck for this feature, we need to know how popular this variant rule is. Answer: no, don't support it. Question five: This is: the last general rule question.

In the players handbook, page 129, there is a rule for massive damage involving 50 hit points and a fortitude check to avoid dying. But on page 128, the rules clearly indicate that 50 hit points is not as much damage to a level 10 fighter as to a level 10 wizard. These rules seem to contradict each other. Is the massive damage rule optional? Answer: no, it's not, but we can choose to not have it or make it an option. Option that that doesn't help.

Anyway, those are the five third edition rule questions. Then I had some additional temple of elemental evil module specific questions. Question one: on page 11, Turjon and Calmert clerics at the Church of St Kusp and Hamlet are described, but it does note which order of priesthood they are: Chapo stars or beay. Any idea Depending on which order they are in? I will need to change their art and dialogue, as well as some of the items they carry. Answer: Ignore this. Okay, they were orderless. Question two: On page 29 in The Secret History of the Temple, it mentions Aaz meeting with Zuckmo. But Az was imprisoned by the mad wizard Zagig — Come on with these names — before the temple was built, and he was not released until after Zuckmo was herself imprisoned.

Since Izz seems to be integral to the module, how do I resolve this? In particular, I can show up and speak with the player characters and there's a chance for dialogue and even an agreement to work together. No answer, I think we because we couldn't wing it I think we just ignored the whole imprisoning thing and can show up and talk like he had met Zuck boy before. Question three: On a related note, Lol has several followers in. In followers in the temple as well as in the moat house, but she seemingly cannot help him. She is described as being routed and her dark followers crippled on page 29.. Should I assume that the events of the giants drow series of modules have already taken place and weakened LOL This answer will affect dialogue with several random encounter drought parties as well and also some temple agents spread throughout the module. The answer was yes.

The giant stra series have already had happened before. Question four: On page 86, Prince Throml is listed as a paladin lord. So we assume he's lawful good, yet his magical weapon, Fragarak, will damage and stun any lawful who touches it.

How do I resolve this seeming contradiction? Should I change Throml's alignment and class, possibly to a caticood fighter? Or should I change the effect of Frag Rock saying Throml is immune to it and it, or should I change it so it stuns Kaddock instead? Their answer was: change the sword to lawful and make it hurt chaotic. Bear in mind, when I asked Giggax he said he wanted to make Prince Froml a special chaotic good paladin.

Question five: On page 94 of the module it mentioned that Zuckmo can be slain and that the elemental nodes collapse when she is Compared to the description on page 93 of her banishment back to the abyss when her throne is defaced, and that the nodes are not described as collapsing when she's banished, Can we assume that slaying Zuckmo in her magical prison will actually destroy her? If so, destroying her leads to a different end story and XP award than banishment. Their answer was yes, Killing her destroys her.

Question six: Many NPCs are not named in the module but they are named in the sequel. Return to the. Elemental Evil by Monty Cook, Although we do not plan to use any elements of the sequel. Should we use their NPC names for continuity's sake, or is that module and its intellectual property not covered under our contractual agreement? This is Tim covering his legal butt.

Their answer was: use them, so we did. Question seven: Similarly, there are also NPCs named in the novelization of Temple of Elemental Evil by Thomas Reed. Should we use those names? Their answer was: use them, so those were the seven temple specific questions. We had two more, and why they?

One is module specific and one is system specific. They were kind of very silly and very specific and they got thrown at me literally when I was typing up these because I had made my questions. A few people on the team added a few more questions and while I was literally typing the email, some people came in and said, "Hey, ask this. So here are the two additional questions we asked. By the way, Watsi answered neither of these.

Question one: why do the hill giants in this module have a 17 charisma? I mean, let's think about that for a second 17 charisma in the game is both how good you look and how good your personality is. So all the hill giants in this game, in the module, I think both as random encounters and inside one of the uh evil temples inside the dungeon — had 17 charismas, meaning they were good-looking and had a great personality.

And we're like: should we give them top hats and monles? Should they speak in British accents? Hello, it's a great day for dying, isn't it? We just ignored it, but it's weird. Does anybody know why? Second question: this is the very specific system question.

If a monk attacks, handto hand and has shocking grass spell on him, if he scores a critical hit, which damage doubles? The hand-to-h hand damage or the spell damage or do both double?

They didn't answer And I have no idea what we did. I know you guys you're going to dig and find out what we did. Also, if you have any question, any answers for any of these questions, what you think the answer should be, leave them in the comments. Anyway, I thought that was a fun thing to find because just so specific, so narrow in scope, but I thought you'd enjoy seeing it, just for the sake of knowing the kind of things you have to think about. If you're going from a tabletop paper and pencil RPG into a computer version, You need answers to very detailed and specific questions like these. Anyway, hope you have a fun Friday.
