+++
title = "The Evolution Of Flaws"
date = "2023-11-06"
id = "S2-q_kswvwU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems", "RPG Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about the evolution of flaws."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about the evolution of flaws.

If you played The Outer Worlds, you know in there flaws is a system mechanic where as you play the game, it pays attention to things you do and then suggest, suggests a flaw you know, like maybe you're scared of robots, or maybe you take a lot of falling damage — a lot, or you're, maybe you're afraid of heights because you take a lot of falling damage. The idea for that germinated almost 37 years before that game. Let me walk you through this, and I think this is a good parallel to the video I did on why ideas aren't worthwhile — because this idea, I mean, came to me when I was a teenager but it took decades for it to be honed into something that I put into an RPG the way I wanted it to be. So let's talk about that, so I know I've told these stories. I'm going to kind of repeat them here a little bit. Just for completeness, but back in high school when I was playing D and D, there was a couple times where low character stats led to really interesting characters. One of them was dumb dialogue which actually ended up in Fallout.

Um, over a decade later. That was a character had rolled a three and put it in their intelligence thinking: I'm a fighter, that's a dumb stat. And I put a restriction on them that they could only talk in single syllable words, mono syllabically, single syllable words. It was an interesting restriction watching them play, and run around the game world and I'd always go: okay, you just used two syllables, and it really made them think about what they were going to say and it made their character sound like you'd expect a three intelligence character to sound and that was super fun. And then the other story was: uh, my friend Joel, who made, who wrote, I think, a five.

He put it in dexterity, which makes you be a cleric, and he played this low deck character and he played him for years. I think he played him through out our, high school campaign and his goal was to find gauntlets of dexterity so he could finally have an 18 decks. But what was cool about that was so here was how this character played and, by the way, when I pointed out to him that when he was surprised, the rule said: you don't get your decks adjustment when you're surprised, not bonus adjustment. Meaning his dexterity was so low that he was easier to hit. He actually it made his AC higher. Remember, in original D and D, High AC is worse, um, which meant when he was surprised he couldn't jump into a sword or into an arrow. He was too surprised, so when he was surprised, his AC was better. That was an odd realization, it, but watching him play this character — knowing that he was frequently going to have a bad initiative, uh, that he could get hit easily, that he had this goal to find a particular magic item, it made that character really memorable. And I remembered that — and it was the first realization I had, a — that players loved anything that made their character unique and that also, they did like overcoming challenges. If you put a challenge in the game that was unique to their character, they loved having to do that.

There was not this. Uh, I'm starting to really regret this low attribute. It was a fun part of their character. So imagine this was in the 80s, so imagine I guess it was the late 80s when I discovered gerps. Gerps was my first.

Skill-based game, so I was used to D and D, which was class-based. Um, gerps was the first time, I think, I played a skill-based tabletop RPG and it came with disadvantages. And I remember thinking why would anyone want a disadvantage? And then, when it was explained to me, you get 100 points to make your character, but disadvantages are worth a negative amount. I was like, oh, I want all the disadvantages, I'm going to make a thousand Point character with one leg and one arm and one eye and stuttering and you know, asthma and just anything I can think of.

And then I found out: oh no, you're only allowed to have minus 40 total. You know, otherwise you'd make an unplayable character. But still you could make a 140 Point character if you took 40 points of disadvantages. I loved it, except for one thing: it always bugged me that I had to pick those disadvantages before the game started. So i' I'd have to come up with a complete concept of my character, unlike when you're playing the game and you, can gain disadvantages or advantages and you can also — um, you — get skill points. I kind of wish I could say, hey, can I reserve minus 10 points for things I want to add later. I want to, while I'm playing, decide my character is afraid of monsters or my character is afraid of magic or whatever.

But there was nothing in the game to do that. We could have put it as a house rule. But I remember thinking, eh, I'd like to do that. So that would have been late 80s, early 90s, jump forward to 2003 and I'm doing tempo of Elemental Evil and I wanted to put something in that I called the ego page. The ego page was things, like: what's the most damage you ever did, most monsters you ever killed, um most powerful spell you ever threw — things like that. It kept track of things your character did that were kind of memorable and players really liked it. But one thing I noticed when I read some reviews and some online comments is people really liked the idea that the game was watching them because they liked my games, because they were reactive. But this was hard evidence that the game was watching and tabulating what you did and people really like that. I was like hell, yeah, I'm glad they like being watched because after Temple starting in the early 2000s, games started coming out with achievements and achievements weren't quests and they weren't tasks. It was the game noticing you had done something and just saying: achievement — you fell more than 100 feet. Achievement — you just killed 10 monsters. Often you didn't get anything for these, you were just told you achieved it that alone was rewarding to players and I was like, wow, they, like achievements just being told you did something — and sometimes it was something they already knew they did, they knew they fell. It's like: wow, I, the game knows I fell 100 feet and survived.

Go me well. Achievements meant that a lot of code had to be put into the game to track the player, or a better way of saying that is: we had to system, syze, systemize a method of tracking achievements so that it was an easy to do. You could at any point in code where you check, you could check that something happened. There' need to be an easy way to throw that in the achievement tracker. So we did that.

That still germinated in my head for a while, until 2016, and I'm putting together the very early system Mechanics for The Outer Worlds and i' I think I've mentioned before, every time I do a game I like to do something new. I like to be able to point at something in the game and going. I don't think you've ever seen that before. It could be a setting, it could be a system mechanic, it could be even an unusual kind of quest or character, but I want to be able to point to and go. I don't think you've seen that before. That's what flaws were for me for The Outer Worlds. They were people were quick to go. Isn't that like G's disadvantages? I'm like yes and no.

It's more like achievements that come with a reward, a of a perk, but it's also like a gerps disadvantage that you get to buy later after your character's made, but not really because you don't. Get to pick it's picked for you. It's us tracking the player and saying, hey, these things have happened to you, we've seen them.

If you agree that this would have this effect on you, which is a penalty, would you accept that and we'll let you pick a new perk? You know we'll give you a perk point. So, by the way, the original design was every flaw had five Associated perks and you got to pick which one. For example, if you were afraid of robots, if that, if you had robophobia, the flaws might be: the increased adrenaline makes you do more damage, or you have a higher movement speed. When you're around robots or you see you, perceive robots from a greater distance. Your perception is treated as plus two because the moment a robot comes into review, you're watching it I wanted to do those we ran out of.

Time, but so that's even kind of. What I'm saying is the. The moral of this, of this whole video, is you can have an idea. It takes a long time for you to find how to express that idea correctly and even then, when you express it, you can probably think you know there probably would have been a better way to do that. This is yet another reason I think ideas themselves are aren't that worthwhile.

It's. It took me a long time to take this idea of a flaw and figure out how to do it in code, how to make it fun for the player, how to make it something they'd want to do, and it came together as a result of a bunch of different things: of seeing gp's disadvantages, um, seeing how people liked having challenges in my D and game, seeing that people liked being tracked on the on the Temple of Elemental Evil ego page and it through achievements and all that came together to with The Outer Worlds's, world's flaws. And it was the one idea. I think I could track through the evolution of it that clearly. But almost all my ideas work that way. If you saw something in a game of mine that you liked, I probably had the idea much earlier and it came from one of my books and it took me a while to figure out how to do it. That's the hard part, so I hope you like this example of how an idea grows into being. Anyway, thanks,
