+++
title = "Games Predicting Our Future"
date = "2024-05-29"
id = "S5bWSh5uVLg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Worldbuilding"]
summary = "I talk about how we designed games that somehow predicted future events in our society. TLDW: we were surprised too!"
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about games predicting our future.

In particular, I want to ask, I want to answer several questions that G works AKA Nicole asked: I've been curious for years how all of you creators get that close to the truth and our reality. Just how do you, one, come up with the ideas for the story of your games? Two, what things in current life help you come up with the future in games? And three, do you have some crystal ball joke?

Some of the things that happened in the Fallout series have insanely happened in real life. The real question is: do you ever feel surprise or shock or anything when ideas you came up with for a game and put in a game become real? Does that ever affect you?

That's a lot of good questions, uh, Nicole, and let me tell you first of all, there were some very kind words. The comment went on longer. Thank you, Nicole, but you know what you said. I thought about the answers for these questions for a long time. That's why it's been a few weeks, um, since this question was asked, um. The reason it's hard to answer is we didn't do these things explicitly. We didn't sit around and going, let's predict the future. It was more of a.

Once we had decided our setting and the background for the setting, we tried to figure out what would naturally happen, and a lot of things that happened are happening in our world too, just because there unfolding from a lot of dystopian starting points. But even though we didn't do it explicitly, I think I can come up with answers. So let's go through your questions in order. First of off, you asked how we came up with the ideas. Basically, we saw things in society that we wanted to comment on, to, expose and for me to make fun of um, we would often talk about things at work that we had read about. We talked about books and movies, um, news, you know, things that were just like can't believe this is happening. We're all in our 20s, so it was things that were just shocking us, like: how are people this dumb?

How are they voting for these things? How are they voting for these people?

Guess what? I'm in my 50s now and I still don't know the answer to that question, but we felt that that there were a lot of ideas in books and movies and even in real life that we were being unexplored or underexplored, um, especially things that no other game was doing. Games, especially in the 90s, were still basically mired in fantasy and, uh, arcade like action, so no one was really doing things.

We're like, hey, let's hold a mirror up to society and see what, see what happens. So that's kind of the origin of a lot of our ideas. Now you also asked, as your second question, what in real life helped predict the future, and this was the one I chewed on a bit, because it's not like we sat around in a conference room going what has been occurring lately that we would like to predict the trends, for it was more of. We often talked about just elements in life that were making our lives harder than they could have been, um, and then we exaggerated those things in our games. Um, we looked for Trends, we noticed Trends, um, like if I were to do that right now — let's say I were to make a game right now — that I wanted to find some kind of Trend in modern society and exaggerate it into some kind of dystopian future.

There are so many things, I don't even know where to start. I made a list and I was like where, should I get started?

Housing issues, the fact that a lot of young people have even given up on ever being able to buy a house and that corporations buy homes to rent out — this is just. There's so many things wrong with this that you don't even know where to start. But you could exaggerate this and imagine a future where almost everything that people earn goes to just giving them a place to sleep at night. Um, you can imagine how horribly dystopian that would be. But the situation of our, medical system is equally dystopian and it's weird to hear people defend it I know people who, when they talk, when we talk about socialist medicine, like they have in Canada or almost every country in Europe or almost every, country in the world, they're like: I don't want that's, that's socialist. And then you start to point out like, well, we have a police force, we have a you know fire uh stations all over our cities.

Because we've socialized that kind of thing, why not Healthcare? No, healthcare, no, that should be privatized. Look at how badly things H happen when the government takes over. Okay, you know, if, any of you are happy with how much your insurance costs and the kind of medical care you're getting, let me know, because I don't know anybody who's happy with that, and that'd be an easy Trend to go into the future and say it's. We're just a few decades away from only the very wealthiest getting Healthcare. Um, there's been weird Trends in higher education: uh, both people thinking it should be free and people because it's so expensive to. People saying it's not even worthwhile to get anymore and yet saying it's not worth why to get.

The demand for getting these degrees, meaning the number of people who are trying to get into the really high-end colleges, has just gone up. Yeah, it's dropped off in a lot of public colleges, especially in California, but private colleges are having record number of applications, so that's something right there. It's like it's a very idiocracy kind of thing where people are discounting higher learning while at the same time thinking it should be very expensive, so only the very wealth should have it, which will just undermine our um, science oriented, uh, industry we have now — and, by the way, I can do a whole side thing about how the US has lost so much of its industrial capacity.

We're very much going into services and Tech and you know steel lumber all. That stuff has decreased so much in the last 50 years. So that's something right there that would indicate the US is getting a heavy dependence on foreign IND industrial capabilities. Uh, you could examine the work week. You know people are saying we should work less and less. You know you can imagine what a four or three or two hour work week would be like. People don't go into offices anymore, there could be remote work. There could be sharing, job sharing where there's a job that's handled by two or three people just a Time slice when they work.

Um, of course, the whole AI thing factors into this. You could easily predict some horrific things that are going to happen because AI will take over job jobs and what's weird is we'll take over the jobs we want, um, like writing and um creativity and art, and it's not taking over the. Jobs we don't want — um, you know the tough labor jobs. I would think that makes some AI to control robots and get that taken care of, but no, that's not the direction it's going. So you can imagine a lot of dystopian Futures with that um. You could take any and all of the things I just mentioned, exaggerate the trend to a dystopian future and, voila, you have a game. I wouldn't recommend taking all of those you've got to focus, but pick one. Exaggerate it, imagine what the future would be like. Make a game around it, be a really cool game to work on and to play um.

Nicole's third question was: were you ever surprised that some of the things you predicted came to pass? We were always surprised. We were not setting out to be prognosticators of the future. Um, we predicted dystopian Futures, but it always surprised. Us that they really, really were happening. I mean, Fallout was us just seeing the corporations were, um, getting bigger and bigger and were kind of leveraging that power to make the government weaker so laws didn't affect them and you know, they could pollute more and do more dangerous things and the government couldn't do anything to stop them.

And that's happening. We did that because it made the. It made a future more interesting to have a game set in. But now it's happening in real life. Um, now, foreign government seemed just as corrupt, but for us it was like, well, they're trying to expand too and they have nukes now we would be like, well, cyber terrorism is the way to go. It's, cheaper and it's way more Insidious. People don't realize how much social media has been infected by Foreign Bots that just spew all kinds of stupid ideas at.

Them and then they, accept it. That's something we could never have predicted. So we're surprised that not only some of the things we predicted are coming to pass, but some even worse things are coming to pass that seem obvious, but everybody denies that they're happening. Um, meanwhile, gas prices have always been rising. That's something that didn't take a lot to predict.

All these events went in an informed Fallout, um, but in a very 50s and 60s style way. I mean, we always went back to nukes and War, uh, not cyber terrorism and you know Androids, but still, yes, we were very surprised at whatever the current political, governmental, economic situation was. We were just trying to poke fun and instead these horrible things came to pass, and I guess what that — what that means to me personally is evil — never disappoints me in how clever it can be. Um, I think Dark Helmet in Space Balls summed it up the best when he said: evil will always Triumph because good is dumb. And I laughed at that when I watched the space Ball's movie. But now, as I'm older, I'm like: wow, it just does seem like good can be really dumb.

Evil was just so clever at finding ways of exploiting the system. I mean, it's like when you exploit a game mechanic, that's fun because it's a game, but in real life your exploit comes at the cost of other people. So I've gone from being younger wishing more people would be good to just saying now, when I'm older: hey, everyone, just, if you can't be good, just try not to be so dumb, try to think about the consequences of your actions and try to do things that are even slightly better for the world and not just only good for you. But I also think this is somewhat hopeless.

But anyway, Nicole, those were good questions. I hope my answers didn't disappoint you and I hope that gave you a idea of what it was like when we working on these games. But good questions.
