+++
title = "Class-based vs. Skill-based RPGs"
date = "2023-09-15"
id = "scvCVwGnT2E"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["RPG Design", "Character Systems"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about class versus skill based role-playing games."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about class versus skill based role-playing games.

I've read a lot of discussion online about this for years. Some people think classes are the way to go, their original, their how things were done a long time ago. They're a tried and true and tested. I've heard other people say, no, skills are the way to go, they're the best, they're the new wave, even though they've been around for 20 years. I think that the real answer, of course, is: uh, a little one, little the other. So what I wanted to do is talk about the pros and cons of class-based systems, because I realized every Pro of class is a con of skill and vice versa. So I'll talk about.

Let's talk about why designers and players even like class-based RPGs. So, first off, classes provide a nice bundle of skills and Feats and other things. It's the designer's way of saying: hey, I've already pre-picked a bunch of things that work well together and have been designed together and balanced together. So when you pick a fighter class, it's good for fighting. When you pick a wizard class, it's good for doing magic. When you pick a rogue class, it's good for stealing it. Just, these things come with, luckily, with good, a good kind of baggage that tell you how to play that class, at least for Fantasy games. There are so many tropes that exist for fantasy and I'll talk about that in a bit, that classes being one of them. It just makes it very easy to know what you're getting, which gives me my second advantage of class-based systems. They're very easy to understand for you, the player who is coming to a new system, when you see: oh, there's a fighter, I have an idea of what he's gonna do.

Oh, there's a rogue, I have an idea. What he's gonna do, and it's not just for you, the player playing that character. If you're playing in a party, it's very easy for them to understand what you're going to do and what your role in the party is going to be. If you're playing a fighter type, you're gonna tank. You're the one who's expected to Wade, you know fourth and attack that monster. If you're playing a wizard, you're probably gonna hang back and shoot spells.

Yeah, there are two classes and yeah, there are some classes that hybridize those two things, but in general, people know what those roles are. Which brings me to the third reason class-based systems are good is when you first start a class-based RPG, it is very easy for you to pick a character. Not only are they easy to understand and all the skills are bundled. It just makes it easier for you.

To pick one because there aren't hundreds of choices. There's usually six, ten, maybe 15.. That's a lot easier to pick than looking at lists of hundreds of skills and wondering: gee, I wonder which one of these are going to be used in this campaign. I?

Um, there was a character that a friend of mine made when I ran a gerps campaign and she put most of her points into savoir Fair because she thought of her character as this Uptown elegant lady. And, of course, when combat broke out she was like: can I save Warfare them? And I asked her exactly what she meant by that. I said: if you can role play it, I'll let you roll. And it was hard to come on like someone's shooting at you with a gun and you're like that's. You know that's a really low class way of acting, don't you think like hmm, not sure, not sure what you're trying to get to happen with that guy with the gun? But it just kind of emphasizes the point of if she'd had a few classes to pick from, that would have been a lot easier. But there were literally, in gurps, hundreds of skills. She had no idea what was going to happen. Similar to this.

Once you're playing the game and you level up, it's easy to level a class because they usually come with a list of skills that they're allowed to buy and Feats. They can advance, and those are often restricted by level, or some of them like their skills that are marked as specifically for that class, so spending a point in them is worth more than if you buy an off-class skill. So you're already guided on how to level up this character. Wherein uh, skill based system. Who knows? And then uh relate similar to that as you adventure and find items.

In a class-based system it's really easy to decide who gets the items. Sometimes items are restricted to a class, like something will drop and they said this is Wizard only or this is Thief only — great, we only have one in the party. They get it, but, like, if a sword drops, you're probably going to give that to the fighter. Maybe the cleric can't even use it or the Rogue may want it, but if the fighter is currently doesn't have a magic weapon and it's a magic sword, you probably want to give it to the fighter first. Then if another magic weapon drops, you can give that to the Rogue and of course the wizard and the cleric don't care about those things. So classes make it very easy to distribute items among the party and then the last big reason class-based systems are popular have nothing to do with players, but anything to do with the designers. It is much easier to balance a class based system because there's only, like I said, a few classes. You can buy it's e, and, those come with pre-bundled Feats and skills.

It's very easy to balance classes against each other. So no one class is much, better than another class. In particular situations, yeah, there will be one class that's a lot better than another class.

One-on-one fight with an orc — I'd rather be a fighter than a wizard. A one-on-one fight with an orc, face to face, of course you don't want to be a wizard. Maybe if they start at a distance and you have time to get a spell off, maybe, but.

The advantages and disadvantages of those classes have already been examined by the designer or the design team and balanced out. That's almost impossible to do if you have hundreds of skills. There will always be some skills that are so situational that somebody who buys up them is just not going to be good in any other situation. Which kind of brings me to the downside of classes: um, when you play a class-based RPG, you kind of have to know how you want to play right away, because that's um, there's only so many classes and they're very limited on what they can do. You want to cast spells?

Don't, take a fighter. You, uh, want to wade into battle. You probably don't want to be a wizard. Um, if the party really needs a Healer, that pretty much restricts what that class is going to be. You basically have to decide that if you're making a party and you want a Healer, someone's got to play it and someone's got to take that class, which brings to the second negative for class-based systems, which is you don't get to play how you want. You may have this really cool idea in your head, but it doesn't really fit with the existing classes. Let's say you're playing d? D and you want to be Indiana Jones, which means you have a gun and a whip and archaeologist, archeology skill.

Well, there's really no good class that covers that. You could probably be a fighter, you know, but that comes with a whole bunch of things that aren't Indiana Jones and you just have to ignore them. You could be a rogue, but that also comes with a bunch of skills that you're never going to use or because they're there and probably good, maybe you will. Use them, but now your character of Indiana Jones isn't really acting like Indiana Jones. The game is telling you how to act, not your conception. And that's a problem with class-based games. Is those, the wonderful tropes that make it very easy to pick and level up a class, also kind of Define how they're going to play them to a big extent it doesn't determine your personality or your background, but I'm talking about, like, in terms of actions, it's kind of predefined what you're going to do. And then the other thing about class systems which is a negative is you can't experience extreme characters. The advantage I talked about all the classes being balanced by a designer. That's great if that's what you want is balance.

I love extreme characters. I love playing a character where I put a ton of points into a few things. I had a group's character once that I gave an 18 dexterity tube that took almost all my points, um. So the few points I had left over I think I got him. Uh, he had a Rapier and he had, he had the skill in that. So he was good at stabbing people and pairing. But if something got bias, Perry, he tended to go down um, and his attacks didn't do much damage because he wasn't very strong, but he would almost always hit and so he'd kind of like Whittle down enemies. It was an extreme character and really cool.

You may not be able to make that in all class based systems. My friend sap walk here Sapphire character certainly couldn't be made in most class-based systems. So everything I just said about classes that are Pros are cons and skills. It's you in skill based systems. You don't.

Have bundled skills. They're not necessarily easy to understand for a starting person. It's not easy for you to join a group and them to understand exactly what you can do.

It's hard to pick what skills you want out of the hundreds of skills. When you level up, you're faced with that decision again: do you want to continue up the skills you already have or do you want to pick a new skill from the hundreds of skills that are available? And it's and there's no guarantee that the selection of skills you pick will be balanced by the designer in that game, or even if he tried to, who knows, like in gerp, for the setting can be wildly different. South welfare would be great in a city-based campaign, really bad in a dungeon adventuring campaign. So I think it requires a lot of intervention from the GM when you have skill based systems, if you want that — the cons of class based or the pros of skill — you can. You have an idea in your head. You can play that exact character exactly how you want, with the skills you want, even if they're really extreme and they don't fit any Trope for the setting you're playing. So I like that. That in some ways, um, everything I just described about class versus skill, you can say about fantasy versus sci-fi settings. The advantage that fantasy settings have is because all these tropes exist.

The character knows, the player knows what a vampire is. Now, yeah, Twilight vampire is very different than a masquerade vampire, but in general it's this blood sucking Spirit. You know Supernatural creature, but when you go to play sci-fi, that is incredibly setting specific.

What's a darlock? Do you even know where that from, without having to Google it? I thought it was Doctor Who.

It's not. Oh, but what's a Reaper? Oh, wait, that is Doctor Who. No, it's not.

At x-com. No, it's not, it's Mass Effect, it's all of them. And those reapers are three wildly different aliens, so, similar to where fantasy and sci-fi have that disparity, so do class and skill based, and you have to overcome, you have to teach the player more in a skill based system. Now, if you look at all my games, I went skill based for Fallout, an Arcanum, two of my first RPGs, and then The Outer Worlds, my latest RPG. But then in the middle there, I went class-based for temple, for vampire, Bloodlines, for South Park, for pillars, for tyranny. So you may be trying to decide: well, do you like class-based, Tim, or do you like skill based? It sounds like you. Liked class, you like skill based, but then you went into class based and then you changed your mind recently. Not really here's.

Here's my rule. I prefer a class-based RPG if it's a multiplayer game or it's a single player game where the player makes a party of characters. I like how class is, Define the roles make, help make those characters more distinct and if it's a multiplayer game, help convey to the other players what role you're be fulfilling. For single player and Single Character, RPGs. I like going skill based. I don't like that restriction of classes. If you want to make some extreme character and play, I almost encourage that. It's fun to see if you can do that.

Groups had a name for um Mages, who only took one spell, but all their points in it. Johnny, one spell, like you, take a firestone, all you can do. Is burn things, but wow, can you burn things? It's really bad when you encounter a fire Elemental which is immune to fire, but for everything else it's awesome. So, and that's just something that you have to learn when you play. So that's kind of the role I use: multiplayer and party based games, classes, single player, Single Character, game skill. If push came to shove and you gave me a bag of money, I'm gonna pick single player, Single Character, so I can go skill based.

It's on my teeter-totter. I'm a little more skill oriented than class, but that doesn't mean I don't understand why class based design is good and what it's used for okay. I think that's a lot of thoughts on class versus skill. I'm sure you have your own thoughts. I just kind of wanted to get it all down. Um, it's come up a few times in comments. And it was on my list of topics to talk about anyway.
