+++
title = "Why I Don't Play Online Anymore"
date = "2024-09-18"
id = "sGkb-nzTgC4"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Multiplayer"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about why I don't play online games much anymore, and I'm particularly talking about multiplayer, and I did it for a long time."
references = ["-lerxozozis", "2j6qqh3H-0Y"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about why I don't play online games much anymore, and I'm particularly talking about multiplayer, and I did it for a long time.

I mean, multiplayer games have been around for a long time. I'm not just talking about, you know, giant MMOs. Even the consoles that started coming out in the late '70s, like the Atari BCS, it supported a lot of two-player games, and even a lot of four player games, and most of the consoles back then did They usually had two ports in the front, um or they, and frequently the second Port could have a tap that would allow multiple controllers. So you — that's how you would play — two and four people games.

And then in the late 80s — and I have a whole video on this — I really got into muds, especially LP mud, and that's something you play online. It was just a text based game, but I was playing that with dozens of people simultaneously from all over the world and that was really exciting and it really made me think this is what multiplayer can do. Then in the mid90s, when I was at interplay, we used to get together one night a week — I caught it the Thursday night thing — and we would play five person Super Nintendo. You know, One controller in the first tap and then four controllers in a multi-tap into the second Port. We' play five person Super Nintendo games. We would play we had lynxes, Atari lynxes, and those supported a ton of two and four person games and quite a number of six-player games and even one or two eight player games. So we were playing multiplayer a ton. Then in the '90s, especially the late 90s, Ultima Online, an EverQuest came out and that just was like mind-blowing — thousands of people on a server, graphical, just so much fun.

In fact I have a whole video. About EverQuest is in my top five game ever. I mean, I loved EverQuest but I don't play games like that anymore. And people try to get me to play games and they were like, hey, I thought you liked, and they list all these games and I realized there's three big things that make me stop playing multiplayer games.

The first one is grouping with people. The second one is all the griefing that happens and then, unrelated to the griefing. The third one is a lot of toxicity and I'll talk about why that's different than the griefing. Griefing is kind of toxicity, a form of toxicity, but it's a very specific form.

So the first one I want to talk about: grouping. When I first started playing MMOs and it was super fun to play with people and most of them are designed that you can't solo past a certain level in your class or past a certain area. Now, some of the classes — I'll talk about ever quest for a second. Some of the classes like Druid and Necromancer, you could solo well past where the other classes could solo, because these classes were fairly powerful and they had a pretty powerful pet, um. Or with Druids you could move really quickly and you had lots of spells you could cast while moving, um, lots of dots. So it was called kiting, where you just ran in front of the monster and dotted it to death. You could do that, but that's not really what they were designed for.

In fact, a lot of the content was designed to require groups. There were dungeons you were not going to ever Solo in. There were whole planes of existence — uh, that you and ra that you were never going to solo.

Fact. They required sometimes way more than the. Five person group, so it's kind of makes sense. That's it's an MMO. It's a multiplayer online experience.

It's designed to be grouped, but finding a group could be a pain in the butt. Guilds were really poorly supported back then. It was some of them. You could tell it was an afterthought.

There weren't a lot of tools for making a guild, contacting your guild, organizing a guild, finding what guilds were available. These are some of the things I wanted to try to tackle in um WildStar when I got a chance to make an MMO later. So just finding a guild could be tough. So I frequently just had a regular group of here's me and four or five people who would like to play regularly. But picking a day where you and five other people could always meet, that was hard, getting them to all log in at the same.

Time was a nightmare. You'd often say: let's play at 9:00. Of course you'd log in at 9:00 and no one would be there, but by like 9:15 still some people weren't there. And then 9:30, some people were there, but now some of the group is off shopping.

They're like, hey, I'm going to go buy and sell some materials. Or, oh, I forgot, I logged out on the other side of the world. I have to run there.

It'll be another 10 minutes, so sometimes you could wait 45 minutes just for your group to get started and you only have a 2-hour window that you agreed on, because some of them have to leave. You know they've got a job. Or they're like: yeah, I told my spouse I'd be done at 11:00 pm, so I'm tapping out at 11, and especially if it's if that person who can't play is someone you absolutely need in the group.

It's like we can't play without the tank, we can't play without the Healer. Yeah, you pretty much stop playing, and also, I will admit myself, I often felt overcommitted, like sometimes I'd come home and yeah, it's Wednesday and it's the weekly MMO night. I just don't feel like playing. I had a rough day. I don't really feel like diving in, but if I don't log in, they can't play, because maybe I'm the damage dealer, maybe I'm the crowd control guy, so if I don't log in, they can't play. So you feel committed to doing it and so it starts to feel like: is this a? Is this fun or is this a? A second job I picked up um.

Another feature of a lot of MMOs and even multiplayer games in general is there are areas that because you have to do. Them as a group, you sometimes have to redo them, because if the if on your first playthrough you didn't get far enough, you may have to restart. If you log out, the thing repopulates. And sometimes it's even worse than that.

There was an area in EverQuest called bef Fallen that you had to play and get a key to open the next part of the dungeon. If you didn't get that key when you were going through, then when if you left and said we're see you all next Wednesday, you have to play the whole dungeon again to try to get that key. And I'm I don't know if it was befallen or other ones, but some of them had keys that didn't survive if you logged out, meaning you not only had to get the key, you pretty much had to do the dungeon in one long play session. And if you didn't you had to restart it next time. So sometimes redoing content like that it got kind of boring after a while. And it led to a second problem of syncing content.

If one person missed a night they may not be able to rejoin you. Now, with the befallen one, that was fine if one person came late or hadn't joined. As long as one person had the key he could let everybody in. But if they hadn't played for a while and their level was suddenly too low, there was some really tight level cap things or level restrictions. In EverQuest, and especially every five levels you seem to get a lot of lot more powerful.

One person misses, gets a couple level behind. They may not be able to join you again, maybe ever again. So that was a tough thing to keep your group synchronized. So as if all that wasn't, bad enough, griefing became a huge problem in Ultima Online and in EverQuest. Now, don't get me wrong, people have been doing griefing forever. There was griefing on L muds, people used to grief on uh, the Lynx games all the time. There was a game called slime world and let you make find a mega bomb and people used to go, you know, throw Mega bombs at people just to blow up them rather than take out the monsters. They were just trying to take out the other players and, yes, that happened. But when you're playing in the same room with people tend to cut that out after a while.

Not an MMOs. Once people became Anonymous, like that, they became kind of like jerks and the early MMOs seemed unprepared for it. But looking back at it now I I think what they really were unprepared for, they weren't surprised. Griefing happened, but they were surprised at the cleverness of the techniques people use to grief and the absolute sheer volume of the griefing that happened. People found ways to grief that they didn't anticipate, even though you could mark it, so like these players can't be attacked or killed by another player, they would do things like train a guard or get in combat with another monster and then bring it over near you and now you're involved and if they were higher level than you, they could train a guard onto you. The guard can't hurt them, but it would destroy you.

That happened a lot. People also found ways to trick people, um, where they would say, hey, let's do a trade and they put items in and then you put your money up and then they pull the item off and hit TR, hit trade and Bam, you're out, your you're out of your money. They would do things called corpse runs, because you know, if you die, they're like, hey, I'll bring your corpse to you, just give me permission to drag it. As soon as you give them permission to drag it, that also gave them permission to loot it, which you could argue was a really bad design. But a lot of people didn't know that.

They just thought, oh, I'm letting them have permission to drag it. They then go find their body they'd go grab the body and take stuff off of it. Even if they only could get permission to drag it. They would do things like drag it into a lava pole. So there was no way you were going to get it back. So now you've lost all your things.

So even when they restrict it to just dragging, they can still grief. You people were clever in some ways. I looked at this: WOW, people spent half this much cleverness in their real life. They'd be millionaires, but the thing that was weird is, even without griefing, people found ways to be absolutely annoying.

Uh, I had heard from some of my group that I played EverQuest with were women and they said their female characters got harassed all the time. So when we played EverQuest and we restarted a new group once — a themed group of the Spice Girls called The Spicy girls, and I was playing a female character, oh my God, I would get hit on. People were always sending me private messages and stuff. It was crazy and I was like: is this what women go through online? It was super annoying and, like I said, people just kept finding new ways to do this. No matter what you did, you know people would follow us around. The spicy girl.

Group around — and just constantly ask questions and you could turn off them being able to direct message you. And then they'd find you. One guy would follow us around so I'd play my Bard Speed song to get away from him. He got a druid to sew him Spirit of the wolf so he could keep up with us. I I ended up, um, like moving back and forth and getting him stuck on things. CU, he was just he had set to autof follow us. I' get him like dragged into a river or stuck on a pillar so we'd, you know, disconnect him and we'd get away.

It's always surprised me how many people did this. It wasn't a small fraction, especially early on. There were a lot of people doing it and their fun seemed to come at everyone else's expense. So that was the worst part of it wasn't just that they griefed and had fun. Part of what they were doing was to make the game unfun for other people. And I got griefed. Once in EverQuest somebody did a thing where they tricked me into doing a group teleport, with them saying they pay me on the other end, and then they didn't, and on the other end they tried to get me killed by dragging some guards on to me, and I got away, but it leaves this bad taste in your mouth like a. These people are bad online and once griefing hits anyone in your group, it affects the whole group. You log in thinking you're going to do a dungeon and somebody got griefed and lost their gear, and now you can't do this dungeon until you go on all these side quests to try to rear them.

Um later, MMOs have gotten better at this, but again, people are. Clever and they still find ways of griefing. And then the later one was: uh.

The last one I want to talk about was online groups always seem to attract the most toxic player bases. Or maybe single player games have toxic player bases, but they just can't interact with you. But the multiplayer games do seem to attract the worst ones, and it's not just online where they say and do all these horrible things that you go to the you know Community boards and online forms and stuff and people are just being awful there and I know a lot of you have that. Lens of all companies are bad, so let's include the companies in this too. There are a lot of toxic companies involved in online games. I mean you, pay to buy the game and then you have to pay to have a subscription to play it online and the game is useless by itself. Then you have to pay to buy DLC, and when new stuff comes out, you know your group has to all have it or you can't do it. And then they had microtransactions in on top, so you know, for cool clothing or armor, appearances or mounts, and it's just money and it's just it's. It seemed like the online community has just attracted the worst of both players and companies.

So probably by the mid 2010s, I've just tapped out of all of this. I've just said I don't want to do this anymore. It coincides a little bit with when I left carbine in 2011 and over the next few years, as I was playing these online games, I realized I don't have to be here anymore. I don't have. I can't even pretend I'm doing research for my jobs because I don't have to do this.

So I just stopped um and now, except for very occasional, limited multiplayer games — things like Minecraft or Terraria, um, as examples of things I played since 2011 — and some couch Co-op. I love couch Co-op. I wish there was more couch co-op games. You know where you could have someone else on the other controller and either you share the screen or it split screens. Games like that used to be super fun, and when you're playing with someone who's right next to you're not going to grief each other, at least not the people I play with. So because of that, now, as of you know, mid 2020s, I'm almost exclusively offline single player games, and I know I'm not alone in this. I don't know what the fix are for this um, because no matter what companies Implement, there seem to be players who are clever and circumvented. And, like I said, it's not just the players.

A lot of companies are doing things that I'm just like. I don't want to take part in this anymore. I I don't want to play a game that's constantly upselling me on New DLCs and new items. I mean, what's it going to be next?

Patches that you have to pay for? I just it's. It's become kind of a gaming nightmare for me, so I just play offline single player games now.
