+++
title = "Skill Design in RPGs"
date = "2024-01-11"
id = "SL_aTjKsxok"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems", "RPG Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about skill design in RPGs in particular."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about skill design in RPGs in particular.

Queen of bad jokes 9413 asks: I wondered how you would approach skills for a new game. How do you choose? What skill types are there? How do you and would you level them? Is there a particular skill that has worked out for multiple games? How can you design for balancing? And are there skill tables too? I mean testing besides in the testing rooms and player testing in the alpha Queen.

That's a lot of questions. I will try to get at it. Um, I made myself an outline so I wouldn't forget things, but this may be long. First of all, I know I've said before that I always do the setting and then the story and then the mechanics. So the setting and Story come first, and the reason for this is when you're doing mechanics, and particularly skills, those are in support of whatever setting and story you've made, so your skills aren't just hey, here are. Some things I thought would be cool to be able to do in a game, but here are skills that would make sense for this setting and support this story. I'm trying to tell so, just like I like defining different paths you can get in Quests, for example, combat, stealth and dialogue is what I did in Fallout and then I added leadership Solutions in The Outer Worlds. This led to skills to support those things, which meant I had to have combat skills, I had to have stealth skills, I had to have dialogue skills, I had to have leadership skills. These weren't, the skills weren't created, and then we thought, gee, what are we going to do with these? It was we had already decided we wanted that kind of play — game play — and there were parts of the story that would be involved with those paths through playing through the story. Therefore, we needed to support those in skills.

So now of course, there's a lot of other things that you can do in a — an RPG: exploration, shopping, crafting. Those need support too, now, not everything comes from quests or comes from skills, um, and you have to address that. But let me just make sure I cover the things I wanted to make sure. If you were making a exploring a haunted house where it's all these incorpor, ghosts or whatever, you probably wouldn't need combat skills. You'd probably want perception skills and dialogue skills and maybe psychic skills.

If you think you need a traps skill, how common are traps in your game? If you're not going to put in a lot of traps, why do you need a trap skill it? Similarly, if you're not going to put in a lot of people to talk to, why do you need dialogue skills? If you're not going to do a lot of combat, you won't need combat skills. I've seen games that include speech skills and then barely make use of them.

So makes me go. Why did you do This now, one thing you're probably thinking is: okay, you're putting in all these skills. When do I make it a skill, versus making it a perk or a trait or a background or any of the other Myriad of character creation elements you've seen in my games? Well, I view skills as something that improve overplay. You use these skills. You get better at these skills. The other ones — perks, traits and backgrounds — many of these are either preconditions, things you were born with. You did not learn them just the way you are — or, if they are, things that you can improve, it's not clear what's exactly. Improving it and even if it is, they just have a few levels. It I call perks, like, some perks are just really chunky skills. They skills that only really have three levels or five levels and, yes, you're improving them, but they're it's doing in a very coarse way.

Now that brings me to thing I really wanted to talk about skill ranges. I think this is the one of the most important discussions you can have when you're thinking about putting skills in your game is: exactly what are the ranges? Skills start that. Let's assume they all start at zero. Do they go up to 5, 10, 20, 100, more than that?

My hands over here. Um, let's talk about each one of those and the pros and cons of doing it that way. Let's say you wanted scills to go from Z to five. Well, this, those scales, should probably only be. Increased when the player character levels up, and even then you probably only give one point, because spending a point in a in a skill range that only goes from 0 to five is a big increase. You're going from 1 to two to three. That's a 20% increase at each jump. In fact, I would consider if you're really thinking about doing skills with this small of a level range. Consider just doing perks instead and not having skills.

I think we all know a game that did that. Um, another thing you really have to think about is, with skills going in a range of 0 to five, it's really hard to create bonuses for those skills. So, look, you have a pickpocket skill that only goes from Z to five and you make these silken gloves of pickpocketing.

What's the bonus on them? And if they're plus two, that's almost half the range of that, the entire skill. Why put points in it if you can just find those gloves? So you have to really think about what will affect the skills before you can even think about what the range is you want on those skills. So let's increase it to 0 to 10. Let's see skills go from 0 to 10.

Again. I would probably limit skill increases to leveling. But instead of one point every time the player levels, maybe consider giving two, maybe put a restriction saying you get two points but you have to spend them in different skills again, these are a little hard to make bonuses for because let's say you have a skill for picking a lock and you want to make. You know glasses of lockpicking, you know magnet, finding glasses that make it easy to lock pick.

Again, you put a plus two bonus on that thing you've. Just done an entire player level Worth, or two levels worth of bonus for glasses. Um, it's crazy, so I would even consider, at that range again, not doing bonuses from items.

Let's talk about 0 to 20 as a range now we're talking. This is where I'm more comfortable with skills having ranges from 0 to 20. Yes, you can increase them from leveling. But occasionally I'd put in bonuses from other sources, from items, maybe spell Buffs, maybe drug Buffs, but I would limit those bonuses to plus one or plus two. Even on a range of 20, I'd still limit them to a plus one or plus two bonus and I'd probably say they don't stack. So once you're getting a bonus to your skill from any Source, no other source will give you a bonus unless it's bigger, and then that source is the bonus and the other one isn't. So there's no stacking of bonuses in there.

Let's talk about the final range, 0 to 100. So if you want to do scales from 0 to 100, okay, now we're talking. Now you can give lots of points. When the player level is up, he can spread them among different skills. You can have bonuses come from different sources. You could have armor that gives bonuses. You can have spells to give bonuses, you can have drugs that give bonuses, and I'd probably put some sort of stacking rules in. So maybe the three highest sources of bonus add into it, or maybe each type of bonus can stack so you can have the highest bonus you're getting from your armor adds to the highest bonus you're getting from a spell, adds to the highest bonus you're getting from a drug. So the highest of those three sources, they all add together. So now you can have three. Three different bonuses increase your skill. I think this is a really cool way of doing it?

And because of that in my games I've always LED. I've always leaned towards 0 to 10, 0 to 20 or 0 to 100 as my skill range. Then, finally, you asked about how to balance it and use them in the game, and I know you're probably thinking about when I talked about loot tables and how to drop items. What we tended to do in all the RPGs was come up with some estimate for every map, either based on the level of creatur creatures in the map or the expectation of what the player level would be in the map or what story act that map is primarily involved in. So how far along the player is in the story and the skill ranks are based.

On that um example. Very good example of this is determining what ranks to check in dialogues for speech skills. We would often make those test against higher and higher speech skill ranks as you went farther and farther into the game, either into tougher Maps or maps that occurred later in the game in later parts of the story. Now you can hardcode those, but another really clever thing to do is to Define ranges and say this is an easy speech check, this is a hard speech check, this is a really hard speech check and this is a near impossible speech check. And then those reference in a table what actual ranks you mean. So if your ranks went from zero to of 20, an easy one might be three, a hard one might be 12, a very hard one might be 16 and a near impossible one might be 19. So for 0 to 20, those are the ones you could use and then everybody just checks against. This is a hard check. This is a near impossible check.

After the game is put together. You can go through there and decide. This hard check should probably be an easy check, or I think all hard check should go from 12 to 13, either because you think it's too easy to get 12 or it should just be a little bit harder, or it has something to do with how many points you're giving per PC level and you don't want the player to be able to pass a hard check until they're this level, for whatever reason. If you abstract the skill ranks you check against, it's easy to adjust them later and then you can do this for a lot of things you can make. Put ranked uh difficulties on locks on computers that. Have to be hacked on um, when you pickpocket someone it can be based on their level. So the level you make an NPC is how hard it's it is to pickpocket from them, among other things. So you have all these things you can adjust if you want to make the game harder without necessarily going back and adjusting anything about the skill itself. So those are my thoughts on making skills, on what skills you need, based on your story and your setting um, what skill range you want to use, and whether you should, instead of skills, make it a perk or a background or a trait, and then, finally, how you can actually balance getting all the skills in there. This is kind of the techniques I use. Works pretty good, I think, so, queen of bad jokes. I hope that answered your question.
