+++
title = "Code Refactoring"
date = "2025-01-15"
id = "SuMElKtydDQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Programming"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about code refactoring."
references = ["hZEosFcqmcU", "QWAetn0Ch9I"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about code refactoring.

B 892 asked in the games industry: how do you handle code refractors? Is there time for it? How do you approach it?

Are there dedicated time periods dedicated to refactoring or is it done in small bits throughout development? B? That's a really good question.

I thought I did something, but when I looked, all I did is kind of mention code refractor when I did a video on optimization, which I'll link below. But code refactoring is done for more than just optimization reasons, so let me get into it. First of all, what is code refactoring? That's whenever you restructure existing code, so code that's already written and works, to make it better — and I'll talk about what better is. But usually it means you're rewriting it because you want it to be cleaner and faster. It's usually bug free before you start, but I've had some code refactors because there was a pernicious bug that I literally could not find and I refactored the code and it disappeared. So so let's talk about why you would want to refactor code.

There are three big reasons you want to do this: efficiency, maintainability and reusability — and these are all different. They're a little related, they have a little bit of overlap, but there are three different reasons. You want a code refractor, so let's walk through them and I'll give some examples.

The first reason you want to do it is efficiency. Maybe you have code and you want it to be faster or use less memory that's. That's primarily the stated reason people say they want to refactor code. Usually programmers are like, hey, I could do, I could do this better if you, if I had second time. Usually this is done by. You see how your code is really being used by the time you go to code. Refactor, other systems are in place and they're using this particular piece of code. So you see, like, how's it used, how frequently is it used, how many objects use it that kind of information should guide your refactor and your rewrite of the code. And I'll give you an example.

Let's say that you have some piece of code that at some point it has an array that things get put into and occasionally Resorts it and you wrote it has a simple insert. It just throws it at the end and then when the resort comes in, it just does like a quick sort of the entire thing. But when you're actually looking at how it's used later, you notice that usually the because the array is sorted and things are just being inserted at the end. Quick swort is not the best thing to use here. There are other algorithms. That work a lot better with an almost already sorted array. So, right, then you might think, well, I may need to change my sort algorithm. But then you think, well, wait a minute.

If the array is already sorted, it would be easy to insert the new item at the correct spot because you do one linear pass, bam. However, this would depend on how frequently you're inserting and how fast that insertion needs to be. If that insertion needs to be near instant, it's easier just to throw it on the end and then sort when you don't have to worry about time.

We used to do things in several games. I wrote where we, there were times where there were lots of CPU Cycles available, so we would do things then. A perfect example of that was when certain uis would come up, whether it was uh, inventory or looking at your character. Build or even bringing up an options menu or the pause menu. The game would be paused, so suddenly a lot of systems which eat a lot of Cycles, like AI or even rendering, suddenly those aren't doing anything. You can use those Cycles to do other things. For one of our games we use that to do garbage collection, because Unity garbage collects when it thinks it's necessary, which can cause stuttering in your game. So the way we avoided that is, we manually called garbage collect. At times we knew a stutter would not be noticed, because a stutter of 100 milliseconds is really noticeable in a 30 or 60 frames per second game, but is not noticeable at all when you bring up a pause menu and you're like, hm, I wonder if I want to change an option or I think I'm going to go make a sandwich 100 millisecond pause. To do a garbage collection.

No one's going to notice in terms of this array resorting. It may be that you can, you're free to resort that array in one of these downtimes so you make insert super fast and then who cares how long the resort takes? Or it may be that both of them have to be as efficient as possible. So maybe you add it to the end and you use a better sort algorithm, or maybe you do. When a new item comes into that array, you stick it in the right spot, so that way you never have to do a sort. It depends on how it's used, so without that information, without usability information, you, the programmer, cannot make that decision, which is one reason — code refractors, I recommend pushing it off. Wait to see how your code is used, just like optimization, doing too early of a. Code refactor is bad, and I'll talk about that. The second reason you want to do code refactor is maintainability. If this is code that's generic enough that you're you intend to use it in other uh games you're writing or you're doing like a live service game or just a big enough game that you're going to have to come back again and again to look at this code to potentially add new features or to fix bugs. That you didn't see when there was 100 play testers, but you're seeing it now that there's a million people playing your game.

You want that code to be very clean. It's called less spaghetti code because you want a new programmer, because who knows if you're going to be the one doing it, or even you, six months later, know what's going on here. People always say: well, why are you even writing spaghetti code? Spaghetti code happens a lot in the game industry because changes happen to the design of the game. Either the design was flawed, but you didn't realize it till you implemented it, or a better idea came along. Maybe you put it in front of a focus group and they're like: well, if, this UI just worked this way, that would be easier. By the way, I've seen, I've seen and written some really bad spaghetti code in UI because you have to write it over and over and over again to try to accommodate how people are actually using it. When you rewrite it over and over again frequently, it, even the most simple design change, can result in a dramatically big change to your code. This leads to Spaghetti code, where a method that was is named one thing and was supposed to do one thing is now doing three. Things, or some method that was only supposed to be called once or twice is now being called every update, just or just a method got longer and longer until finally it's like 10 or 20 pages of code and you're finding where to make a change in. It is a nightmare.

An example of that would be, uh, one of the Fast Travel, one of the games I made that had fast travel. Time would pass during fast travel if it took you take, if you went from here to here. When you arrived we would calculate: well, okay, 3 days went by, advaned time, 3 days.

Well, guess what? That would Advance status effects that would tick — many of them, ticked every heartbeat like every two seconds if a status effect was a DOT, a damage over time that could kill the player. So it was weird that you walked all this.

Distance, arrived in this town and fell over dead when that dot should have killed you 2 minutes after you started out. So now you have to make fast travel constantly, tick time really quickly as it goes along. But then if one of those effects — caused to popup UI like something — comes up and it's like you're low on health or you know you still have poison, do you want to take care of that?

Can that happen during fast travel? Maybe your fast travel UI, once it's once it's started, can't really handle a pop-up UI interrupting it and you have to change it. So it can those two changes: the continuous ticking and pop-up UI. It's going to make your fast travel code look like a mess and when you're done and you have time, you may want to go back and go. Okay, now that I know that time has to tick.

Continuously and pop-ups may occur, I want to rewrite some of this fast: travel code. And then the final reason you want to refactor your code is reuse — usability, which is separate from maintainability. Maintainability is you just keeping that code working correctly and being efficient and bug-free as the game is live or has DLC added to it and new features. Reusability is you may want to pick up that piece of code and use it in another game you're doing. You don't want to remake the wheel every single time you make a game, so refactored code can often be made more reusable by isolating it the specific parts. So now you can have a module or sometimes even a library, and you're like: this is used for this thing, which is very generic. I can use it in a lot of games, so I want to make that code. Very efficient for reusability. An example of this that I've talked about on this channel is when I took all of the Dos specific cause in Fallout and isolated it to a library called ganol because we knew we were changing it to Windows. We were also going to make it run on windows so that let us rewrite all those dos calls to be Windows calls just in the library.

The game itself had no idea this change was happening. If it needed a window to pop up or it needed input from a mouse or keyboard, it just called into ganal. How ganal got that information or displayed things was a mystery to the — to anyone who was writing in the Fallout game code. This was so effective, by the way, that one of the first things I did after leaving interplay was write a brand new library called TIG.

Ganal stood for gan's. Not Windows. TIG stands for TIG, isn't ganal. TIG had even more advanced Windows features, things that I didn't do because I needed to support Doss. I stopped supporting Doss with TIG and got even more advanced Windows features in it. This gon TIG made it very easy to Port the game when we wanted a Mac version.

You only had to change calls in those libraries if you wanted to update something. Like if a new version of direct came out, the only thing that used it was inside those libraries, so nothing in the, in the, in the game itself, had to change.

There's an entire video on gon TIG and I'll link it below. So now let me get into what the pros and the cons are for code refactoring. The pros: I shouldn't have to go over done right, it's everything I just said. You'll have faster code, better code, cleaner code. However, that done right phrase is doing a lot of heavy lifting here. So let's break down what I think to be a lot of cons of code refactoring. First of all, it's frequently done too early. Programmers will love to say: yeah, I just wrote something, I want to refactor it.

Really, you don't even know how it's going to be used. You don't even know if it really has any bugs in it or if it's too slow for the application. But like, yeah, but I can make it faster. But what if you don't need to? If you have something that's called once every 10 minutes, who cares?

So I've seen early refactoring frequently, just the same way, I see early optimization and look at that in the optimization bit. My recommendation here is: wait to see if you even need to refactor it is your code too slow? Is it too? Messy? It may not be, and just having a better idea of how to do it is not a good reason to refactor and then doing it too frequently again. I've worked with programmers who they want to refactor at. When they get to the end of the task, they're like: okay, I've written everything and it's working. I want to refactor, now they want to refactor if they have a. I have a better idea of how to do this, let's do it. Or you're just about to go into the bug fixing phase and like: well, I'm going to refactor a lot of my code and that should handle a lot of the bugs. No, that is a bad idea, first of all, they want to refactor the same code over and over and over, which causes the opposite of spaghettification.

You write: um. What I think is you get too clever with it. And I'll talk about that in a minute.

But a lot of programmers get way too clever with their code, which really harms them. Going back to it later, but anyway, if the basic idea here is, if memory and speed and readability isn't an issue, why are you refactoring? Don't do it? Also bear in mind?

A huge con of refactoring is: yes, you might be able to get rid of some pernicious bug you couldn't find, but you might introduce a new one. Every time code is Rewritten, there's a good chance that bugs will get introduced, and rewriting is writing code. So every time you write code you may be writing bugs.

So think about that. You may have really good code. You may refactor It's a little bit faster, even though it didn't need to be, and now there's a bug in it which you definitely don't want. The other reason: to refactor: to make it more readable. You can be, you can refactor code thinking you're making it more readable, but you actually make code that's no easier to understand or maintain or, Worse, harder to maintain. I've seen programmers look at something and go, oh, there's a better way I shouldn't have, there's a better way to do this. I shouldn't have used sort, I should have used radic sorting or I should used something that they think is incredibly clever and a little obscure. So they refactor their code to use that and then later on, six months later, they come back to it and they have no idea they've completely forgotten what that kind of sorting was. Or worse, a new programmer looks at and goes: I've never seen anyone do anything like this. I don't even know where to start, because you're trying to take your code, maybe, and add one new. Feature, but you've made it incredibly rigid by your refactoring. That's, a problem, and then, finally, the biggest con with refactoring — and you hear this from producers — is sometimes it will cost you time and therefore money for no immediate benefit.

The existing code is bug-free, it's not contributing to in any major way to the speed SL, any slowdown in the game, it's not using a lot of memory or whatever, and you have programmers go. Why want to refactor it for some abstract, later benefit? And It's completely fair for a producer to push back on that and going: we have a lot of right now benefits that you could be doing. Why are we doing this for a later, abstract benefit we may never need? And that is a weird conversation to watch happen between programmers and producers. And it's because of this — and I say this as a programmer — I've said before on this channel — that programmers love to feel one way but try to logic their way out of the explanation. They just want to refactor code, but they don't have a good reason to refractor their code. But they will argue for hours that they're being logical, when they just really want to, and sometimes just wanting to isn't a good reason to. If you can't State a good reason, can't. If you can't State a good reason, don't refactor your code. So let me sum up: refactoring is just a tool. It's a tool like all tools. It can help you a lot if you do it for the right reasons.

Like all tools, it can be misused, used and result in lots of bad things in your game. So code refactoring efficient. Do it for Efficiency, do it for maintainability, do it for readability, but you don't always have to do. It, so I hope that answered your question B 892.
