+++
title = "How To Be A Good Game Director, Part 2"
date = "2023-07-30"
id = "sYZCYDRQtSs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Director"]
summary = "This is my second video about how to be a good game director. You can see part 1 here: https://youtu.be/F7uaMQnMsvI"
references = ["F7uaMQnMsvI"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to do a part two about being a game director, and I'll put the part one Link in the description.

The reason I wanted to talk about this was not only after I did when I did the first one about being a game director. There's some stuff I forgot to mention because it's all — it's an awfully vague term, enroll. But also people ask questions that I wanted to get to an answer, but most of them are fairly short answers. So I thought, okay, when I have enough of these, I'll do a part two and talk about being a game director, part two. One thing I mentioned, uh, in that video and other ones, is that when I play games now, I am overly Critical with them. I, I'll be playing a new game. It will install startup and I'm like, uh, why did? Why is this the Cinematic you chose? This isn't teach me about your world.

The UI will pop up. The first main menu and I'm like, uh, this main menu is bad, why aren't these combined? Um, when I go to options, why don't I see this option immediately, it's, bad.

But you have to realize, after four Decades of being trained to think critically like this, it was hard for me to shake and I felt bad about it I think I complained about it in the previous videos. Oh, I wish I didn't do this.

And then I was watching a documentary short about the making of good Omens too. I should just say I love good Omens. Awesome that I read the book, loved it, really liked the, TV show that was made specifically. Uh, the relationship between aziraphale and Crowley was just awesome. Of course, I can watch anything with David Tennant and Martin Sheen. I watched staged. I don't know if you've seen this.

It's basically. Those two talking over Zoom, either just between themselves or with other people, with tons of insults, and it is hilarious. But it's so obvious that those two actors are good friends and it's obvious from watching good Omens. But what struck me during the short was Neil Gaiman, famous author.

Love his stuff, Coraline, the graveyard book, all great stuff. He was explaining his early work as a writer and he went to writing classes where he discovered that he was doing something fundamentally wrong, that he was reading other books as a member of the audience, as someone who was reading it to enjoy it and not critique it, and he learned that, no, you should read a book as a fellow Craftsman, which is very different.

It's more critical. It's more judgmental in a way, but you have to admit you're. Not trying to enjoy this story. You are trying to learn from it, which means this is what they did, good and this is what they did bad. And as a game director, you have to be the same way. You are not approaching this game as someone at home would and thinking, okay, you know, are they enjoying this? You have to think way past that to is this good, is this the way it should be? You know, takes you into things like balance. The home user or no player, well, may not care as much about balance as long as they're having fun, which is, by the way, how I like to be — but, if it's too unbalanced, if the tone changes too wildly, if the if things are inconsistent — uh, contradictory — you want to make those changes, even though many people who are playing the game won't notice and some who notice won't care. You still want to make those changes and as a game director, you are going to touch everything in the game: design, Code, art, music, not just your specialty.

This is something for the longest time, you know, I was like I'm not sure I should touch art, but then it occurred to me. I can't play a single instrument, but I was the one who provided all the source material for the music in Fallout because it really mattered to me. I cared about the music in Arcanum and Temple. I like getting involved in the audio part of games, sound effects especially. I will often go back to the audio department where the sound effect sounds wrong — um - and I'd have reasons for that because I think that's really important. It's a part of the game experience that often people think. Of.

Last it's like, oh, I got this weapon, what does it look like, how does it fire, and all this and you're forgetting the fact that you know there's so much other stuff to this weapon. That's part of the player experience: the sound of it reloading, the sound of it firing, the sound of a hit, the sound of a miss, the sound of a critical hit. So those are all things that you have to dive into now.

As I got older and my color blindness got worse, it was much harder for me to have art critiques that a could be taken seriously and B I was 100 sure in the validity of, because I was seeing far less of the artwork the way the artist intended, which is why I was super happy on our world that Leonard kind of took care of all that. But one thing I did do: and I didn't do it enough early. Keep in mind: game director is only a name that appears, a role that appears next to my name in The Outer Worlds. But I certainly acted that role in Fallout, in Arcanum, in Temple, because everything I just described to you are stuff I did in those games. I played it, I worked on it, I looked at it all critically, even areas outside my specialty, and I was the final word in a lot of these. Now I shared that in Arcanum, uh, with Leonard and Jason. The same way I shared it in The Outer Worlds with Leonard, but that didn't mean I didn't make comments to Leonard about art and narrative, for example, in the The Outer Worlds.

So you will play this game. You will play the game if you're a game director more than anyone else on the. Team, with the possible exception of QA, and the reason sometimes you'll play more than them is QA approaches their work very differently. Someone in QA, their job is to find bugs and imbalances, but they frequently replay levels over and over, where, often as a game, and over and over where, often as a game director, you're jumping to random spots and just play, and sometimes you're jumping at the beginning and see how far you can get because you want to see. Vertical slices are important where you have a level that has all the features in it that the player may want to do. So This Love, This level supports combat and stealth and dialogue and crafting and getting Companions and all the things you want to be able to do in the game. But you also have to think about what I call the horizontal slice, which is: how is the game?

Logic longitudinally from beginning to end? Does it feel right? Uh, is it pacing correct?

Those kind of things that you can only get from a long play, and there are people in QA do that. But a lot of people in QA are replaying the same areas every day, sometimes with different characters, to see how that works. So I'm saying, in addition to QA, no one is playing the game more than you and you have to play the game a lot and you have to be critical in a way that the home user won't, because every player is different, but you have to make sure that you're trying to craft as good of an experience for all of them and not just people who play just like you. So I may not like playing a pacifist playthrough, but I want to make sure that those people have fun. I may not like playing someone who talks to everybody all the time, but you want to make sure that that player has fun. So that's something that's really important for a game director to do, even if that's not how they normally play. And let me get back to what I was talking about with playing the game from start to finish it.

People have asked about this on the channel, and it's called maintaining tone, and this isn't just a balanced thing. It's tone is like: remember that you, as the game director, wrote those design pillars. So, even though you may not write every design document — you almost certainly won't write every design document — you'll write a lot of them, but you're not going to write all of them — the ones that don't aren't written by you should still comply with those design pillars. And when you play the game, you should never find anything that is, um, violating one of those design pillars. So it's important to play the game from start to finish with those design pillars in mind from the very beginning, when you create those design pillars, from the earliest designs, from the earliest meetings, including meetings with the Publishers or whoever is going to be providing your funding, it. There's a bunch of different ways of getting games funded now, including doing it yourself. Those in those meetings, you're the one who's representing the game as a whole.

So when people have questions about well, is it always? Is it? Are there gonna be jump scares in it everywhere? Is it really depressing everywhere? Um, where will the game get funny? Where would the game gets serious? Uh, where we'll have opportunities to dive more into the lore on this? Where are there places where you might learn a mystery? Or two?

That's a complete side quest. How many of those Mysteries will get solved by the end of the game? These are things.

As a game director, you should just be able to know an answer, because no one should know the game more than you. Now, particular narrative designers, particular artists, particular programmers will know a lot more deeply about their specialty, but no one should have a broader overview than you. And this is all throughout the game, including the very, very end. Um, you're the one who's probably checking every level, checking every item, every character, to make sure that not only Sports does design pillars, but that the tone and feel is right. Balance is an issue here. I didn't do it enough early on in my games, which is why, like when I talked about Fallout, I mentioned maybe first date and doctors should be combined. Maybe there weren't enough uses, for energy guns at the beginning of the game. These are things that, as a game director, I should have stayed more on top of these. That's the kind of feedback you'd expect from a game director. This often means at the end of a game, when you literally have thousands of bugs and issues. There are some issues that aren't classified as bugs. They're more like this doesn't feel right or we could do a better job here, but it's not a bug.

Those are all in jira or whatever your bug database is. You're the one who ultimately responsible for prioritizing those. You're a publisher. Whoever Project funding will certainly have things that they're telling you this has to be fixed before you ship. But there's a lot of other things that you decide on the priority of and that won't often be in agreement with everybody on the team, but nothing ever is. If you tried to put a committee together on that, you're never going to get the committee to be 100 in agreement on any of these things.

So, yes, you listen to your leads. But ultimately you're the one who's prioritizing a lot of these issues. That's why every game ships with some bugs, with some other issues, because if you cannot get to all of them — and in big, complex games you almost certainly won't — the game director is the one who's prioritizing all that don't always do a good job.

Certainly we've shipped with things. People, I can't believe they ship with that. But you know, if you explain. Yeah, I know that's really in Balance, but we were looking for a crash bug. Certainly the crash bug probably has priority over an imbalance of a particular Play Type in a particular set of levels.

Never a good answer, but since you usually don't, have enough time to do everything you ever want — and maybe you shouldn't — because look at my videos on Arcanum — that we put everything in the kitchen sink in there and I don't think that was necessarily a good idea — the game director is the one who's holding all the stuff in their head and trying to prioritize and get everybody on the team in the same direction, with the same tone, making the same game. That's kind of the overriding rule of what a game director does. So I hope this answers some more questions that came up on the first video. Um, if you have any more questions, leave them here. Maybe I'll have to do a part three. But being a game director is a complex role and the nature of the role is that it's a little more vague than something very specific.

Like you are the sound. Effects audio guy.

That's a very specific role, so a game director often finds themselves wondering: did I get everything done? Did I look at everything? Did I prioritize everything correctly when the game ships, it's part of the role anyway, I hope this answered as many new questions you had as the first one did.
