+++
title = "The Trials of The Temple of Elemental Evil"
date = "2023-05-14"
id = "t4718r53zAs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Temple of Elemental Evil", "Production"]
summary = "Hi everyone, it's me, Tim, so by now we've I've talked about troika's games, Arcanum and bloodlines."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone, it's me, Tim, so by now we've I've talked about troika's games, Arcanum and bloodlines.

I've even talked about the secret DOD project, and I've talked about our demos for Lord of the Rings and for our post-apocalyptic game, Epic. I've not talked about Temple, so let's talk about Temple. Temple it's um troika's worst scoring reviewed game. I think it's the worst reviewed game of my career. I kind of want to explain how it became that and, for people who think I'm just gonna give excuses, this is an explanation and just so you know, everything I'm going to talk about is either the result of a bad decision I made — or because of a contract that I read, agreed to and signed, so I'm to blame for all this is. Get that out of the way, and now let me talk about what actually happened when we were making it, so towards the end, actually after Arcanum. So after Arcanum, we started working on Journey. To the Center of Arcanum and then that didn't happen and so we started doing Lord of the Rings and that didn't happen.

It was early 2002.. Troika was approached by both Activision and Atari — they wanted us to make license games — vampire or d?

D — and they wanted all three of the principals — Leonard Borowski, Jason Anderson and myself — signed on as key man. We thought it would be smarter to do both so we wouldn't have all of our eggs in one basket. So we divided into teams. Leonard and Jason did bloodlines and I went on Temple. That meant also we had to hire. We Temple got some people from Arcanum.

Vampire took the bulk. I had to hire up a bunch of new people, but the contract — and I'll get to it — wasn't for a lot of people, so it wasn't like I had to staff up you. Know 20 or 30 people, so that was probably where things started to go awry, because I didn't have Leonard and Jason to work with. I figured I would do the design, because Steve Moray was going to handle the code, and not only system design but narrative design. And what did I base This brilliant idea on?

Well, I wrote a lot of like journal and lore content in both Fallout and Arcanum, things like the fev being a Byron. I just I wrote all that from scraping together biology classes and some reading. I also wrote the intro, The Fallout, the whole war, never changes thing, which really resonated with people. So I thought, wow, I'm not a good writer.

No, turns out Ron Perlman could read the phone book and it would be good. So so we dove in to — or I should say I dove into — contract negotiations with Atari. They wanted us to do it in 18 months, which is super fast. Let's compare Fallout New Vegas — the far superior game was also made in 18 months. It had over twice as many developers on it, using an engine that already had the system mechanics coded in, although they changed some and a lot of art provided we were using the Arcana mention that we modified for the Lord of the Rings game, so it already had pre-rendered backgrounds, but we were going to, for Tempo, add 3D characters for the player characters, all the NPCs and the creatures. Plus we had to do all the system Mechanics for DND version three: class spells, monsters, all of it I asked if we could drop Druid and Bard classes because they're a little weird. They have a lot of special abilities.

I think I also asked for platin, but my notes say druiden, Bard, so druidenbard tari said no had to be all of it that was one of the first mistakes I made with the contract, but not the last. So I said: okay, let's do that. They told me I could pick whatever module I wanted and I let Nostalgia blind me. I have been playing D? D since I was 14..

I really wanted to do a guy gax module. Gray Hawk wasn't represented among other d modules. I loved tempo of Elemental Evil. I picked that one. They were like: okay, the. I thought the advantage that was they.

You know Watty published it. They should agree to everything that's in it I was wrong. Should have put that in the contract. My mistake, so we started doing it and, by the way, several people that we ended up hiring had never played d. So I started doing a Wednesday afternoon session for about a month or two to teach everybody d, and I made up something. Just it was: Duke sends you to pick up an ancestral tapestry from his old home and there are Bandits there and it turns out one level's haunted and then there was something horrible in the basement and abandoned leader escaped with the tapestry and you had to chase him down to a necromancer layer. Several people on the team after Temple shipped said I wish we had done that one and not Temple of a little evil, because that one was a lot of fun. The problem with Tempo is I picked it without knowing anything about what our engine was going to be able to do so so we started working on the game and I'd be hired up people and we'd just dove in real quick and we coded for DND 3.0 in the middle of development. Right, Smackdown, development watch is like, oh yeah, we're gonna be coming out with 3.5. And I was like, did you know this? You must have known this when we started.

No answer. We really think would be better if this was 3.5 instead of three and I'm like I need more time. I asked for three months, they gave me two, I agreed, even though there's a lot of changes between three and a half and three. So we did that. That was almost about the time we hit the idea of how are we going to let the player pick alignments, because it would be really weird to have, like, an assassin and a paladin in the same player party. Having an assassin NPC join is very different than the player having a lawful evil assassin and a lawful good Paladin. So we came up with the idea of group, a group alignment, that you picked a group alignment and then you had to pick alignments that were within one step of that and that would prevent paladins and assassins in the same group.

And then that meant I wanted to make a vignette. One vignette for each one of the nine alignments. That kind of explained the reason that particular group was coming to Hamlet, the starting Village, this idea.

I don't think this is a good idea, but it was too late. I should have nixed it but I didn't. Because I get hooked onto good ideas. Ask anyone who's ever worked with me. I'd like sink my teeth into him like no, we, have to do this. You know the sky will fall if we don't have this one idea. So we did them. I really wanted them to be an hour each. They were what a few minutes. Tops shouldn't have done. That then remember now we went an 18-month milestone to 20 month milestone in month, in March, on 16 month- 16 of 20 months — Wati came to us and said we've approved stuff in previous Milestones but now we're retroactively unapproving them.

Some of the things they unapproved were names of NPCs from the original module, but that was easy to change. The two things that were the hardest things to change were they wanted children to being vulnerable. That turned out to cause a lot of issues, because there are a lot of rules about what, indeedy, about what other characters can affect combat, and I'm not just talking about. I mean, it would be trivial to just say they don't fight and they don't take damage. But then if you were standing here, a child, does it provide cover from a ranged attack if you're doing a uh cleave and there are some children near you, do they count towards the number of people standing near you for the cleave, because you have to have so many withstand within you to do the please. So I don't know, there was just a number of things that we were like I don't know how we're going to keep the children in there and then find all the special cases where NBCS are counted or covers computed or anything. So what we ended up doing was just turning them off.

Yes, there are some dialogues that reference kids like their kids playing in the front yard. There are no children in the front. But the biggest problem with unapproving is we had already done a lot of content for Noel that was approved and they said, no, take it out. That is why nobe has buildings you can't enter, Nob. Seems shorter than it should be.

The there was a brothel there. The entire brothel just had to be removed. There were so many changes to dialogues and quests and characters that we just it would have taken too long to completely rewrite it, so we just sealed it up. So that was bad, then I think about two months later, so about month 18, I was playing a Bard — actually I made a group of all halfling, all bard, and I was running into a lot of bugs, like from the get-go. So I contacted the Publishers QA department and I asked them why they had not seen these. Because I gave them a test plan of: test these classes, test these races, that's, these abilities, go to these encounters because these monsters have some special abilities that need to be tested.

And their answer was: yeah, we don't like playing bards, we haven't played. Them, if any of you are feeling deja vu, because I know I've talked about this in interviews elsewhere, the exact same thing happened on Bloodlines a year later, when I found out their QA wasn't really testing the Nosferatu Clan, so, anyway, we asked them to start testing those things. I believe Temple shipped with a really bad bug involving bards and it was: oh yeah, if you were on a map and you transitioned while one of your Bard songs was playing, you would get to the next map, but after that point, any transition after that point would crash and I remember people online were like, well, you must have not played bards. I'm like no, I just always turned off my Bart songs before I transitioned. So another thing that happened, starting a few months before we shipped, and I don't think I've ever talked about this publicly. Everybody at Troika knows this happened, so a few months before we shipped I got a kidney stone. Now if anybody here had a kidney stone, you know that it is mind numbing, pain like body racking. When I was at the hospital that night when the pain started I had a nurse who they were preparing me for an emergency CT. She said: if it's a kidney stone, I want to let you know. I've had three children and a kidney stone and I'd rather have an another child than another kidney stone. That pain is unbearable and I'm like I know. So the CT confirmed I had a kidney stone. I was sent home.

Most people pass a kidney stone in a day or two, maybe a week. Mine took four months and it hurt the entire time I couldn't function. I had to go back to my doctor and say I need a.

Very strong painkiller. I'm in, I'm in body racking Agony like Star Trek, the original show, pain booth agony. And he gave me painkillers because he said, yeah, these are bad. The painkillers were so strong that I couldn't drive once I took one. So what I did is I'd go into work very early in the morning with my dog, I'd bring my dog to work and I take a painkiller immediately and then about 30 minutes or an hour later I start working, work all day, drive home, take another one, let that affect hit me. I could have dinner, often went back to work on my home machine because there was a lot to do on Temple, and then right before bed I take another one and that would let me sleep.

This went on for four months. Multiple people on my team and the vampire team started. Getting concerned. I heard at one point they were thinking about doing an intervention. The painkillers adjusted my personality. They adjusted my work output. Again, I'm not saying this is an excuse, It's my work output. But it is an explanation.

I don't think Temple was my best work, especially at the end. Excuse me, so the kidney stone, finally, one morning I was at work was like any other morning: got in early, hardly anyone was there, came out. I was so excited I was running around the office with it on a napkin. It was seven millimeters, for people who are wondering, that's a big one.

The only people in the office were long win, an artist who I later worked with at carbine and obsidian, and Daniel Alpert, who was an intern who later was our art director on the The Outer Worlds. I ran up to them holding a napkin with my kidney stone in it. So proud, so happy the pain was gone. They didn't even want to look at it.

Mean, can you believe it? They did not want to look at my kidney stone, so I took some pictures of it, called my doctor, they told me to come in and then they wanted it. I'm like: well, I want it back. The nurse was like: why would you want this?

I'm like I made it. Took me four months to make it I wanted. She said no, we're going to do a destructive test. Came back a calcium Stone in the standard. But by then I believe it came out either right when we shipped or right after. We were still working on patches. By the way, and this is the other Jerry, on the Sunday Draco worked on many patches, many more than ship. I know there were.

At least two patches that did not get shipped. The reason for this was our contract stated every patch had to be approved by the publisher. Did publisher had decided they didn't want to pay for any more QA. Without QA they wouldn't Mark a patch as official, so we weren't allowed to put it out. We asked if we could pay for QA. They said no. We asked if we could put out an unofficial patch just from Troika. They said no.

Somehow this got out in the wild, you know, people found out and it got perverted into. Well, Trico won't make patches unless Atari pays for them, which made us look horrible and I couldn't say anything about it was horrible. By the way, this would happen again on vampire.

So I know this has. I think that's pretty much most of them, most of the explanations I know. This is a bit more of a negative video than I normally do, but let me tell you I learned some lessons from all this, and Leonard borisk — and I talk about this a lot — that you learn more from the failures of your gains than the successes. Successes really don't teach you anything like: oh, people like that, but you don't know why. When people don't like something, you know why.

So I walked away from Temple and I learned two things: one, I'm a terrible businessman. I should not be allowed to read or sign contracts. And two.

I'm really not that good of a writer. Um, as I learned later, without a world I can write really good shorts. You need a lore for that item.

I'm Your Man. You want a character dialogue? I am not your man.

You want a quest idea. Do you want hundreds of quest ideas? I literally made 100 Quest ideas for Arcanum and put them in a file for people to use. But you want me to and you want me to write the Quest for the log. I can do that. You want me to write characters that talk to you about the quest?

No, so I learned a lot from Temple and I actually I like the game. It's fun, it feels like d? D and it's so pretty, it's so beautiful. I think Temple has gorgeous heart.

Yeah, the quests aren't that good, the dialogue's not that good in the combat spaces are a little tight, but I like it. So I hope I know some of you like it, some of you don't. I hope this video gives you some insight into what actually happens during development, both in and out of control of the Developers. Thanks,
