+++
title = "Quest Markers"
date = "2024-02-02"
id = "TiL2wa66wxs"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Quest Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about Quest markers."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about Quest markers.

Specifically, I want to answer a question from Wes 9353, who asks a question about Quest markers. What do you prefer: pointing at the quest item or Quest enemy even if the enem is invisible, or a quest marker that turns into a search radius, or no Quest marker? Figure it out through dialogue or environmental storytelling?

That's a good question and the reason it's a good question is, if you've played any of my games, you've seen that I have totally vacillated between all of those. I have gone from no Quest markers at all, like in Fallout and Arcanum [Music] to Quest markers in areas, like we did in wildar, to Quest markers on the specific thing you're looking for, uh, in my games. So here's the thing: if you do know Quest markers, there are people who would really dislike the game and then some people love it. If you do area markers, there are some people who don't. Like it, because they don't like having Quest markers. And then there's people who don't like it, CU they want them on something specific. And then there's other people who like it. And then if you do a marker right on the quest, go goal, whether it's an item or an NPC — again there are some people like it.

Some people hate it. What you need to learn from this is: you will not make everybody happy. You just will not, now I know someone clever out there's already thinking: well, why don't you just make it an option, or roll it in with the game difficulty if you don't want it to be a separate option? Here's why I've worked with game developers who ha, hate when you have any option at all that changes gameplay, mechanics, sound options, visual options, accessibility, yeah, but their attitude is: you really need to make? Up your mind on design mechanics and just put them in the game, and then difficulty should really be for things that make the like combat harder and, uh, certain skill usages harder, not, oh, we couldn't decide on a user interface for quests, so we put it, we rolled it in into game. Difficulty also, just so you know, I've seen players complain if a game allows game markers at all, even if they could turn them off in options. So if you think putting in options is going to solve it, there are game developers and game players who hate that, so you're not going to solve it that way. And also so if you decide, if the decision you make is let's not have uh game markers at all, know that everybody just looks things up online, everybody, uh, so, unless the location of the thing they have to. Go look for is completely randomized, like it's a person who walks around, or it's an item that can be in one of five places and you're not going to Mark where they are, they're going to look it up and they're just going to go to. And even if it is randomized, I'm sure enough people will play, it will go, it's in one of these five places, go look.

So that's a lot of rambling and a lot of background, a lot of context. But let me tell you, if I had to pick one today, based on how I feel today and history with stuff with games, I would go with area markers for quests, with the size of the area that the marker says it's referring to, something that can be varied based on the quest, so the quest designer can decide what to do there. Now, specifically, what I mean is when someone's making a quest, they can say, hey, the monsters on dungeon level two in this part of the dungeon. Or they may just say, here's a quest marker at the front of the dungeon. It's the monster somewhere in the dungeon. Or they may just put a quest marker in the valley and say, boom, with a big radius, the monster is somewhere in this Valley. And the player would have to discover, oh, it's in this dungeon level two up in the corner.

Why would I choose this? Well, well, because you can pick any radius you want and, by the way, I've played, I've worked on games where they let you make complex Quest area shapes. Personally, I just think a simple Circle where you pick the radius is fine. The reason I like this is if you pick a really tight radius, you can pretty much have Quest markers. The way they're in games that put Quest markers on things. If you pick a big radius saying it's somewhere in this Valley, you know the NPC may have told you that all the monsters located in this Valley and then, depending on what you set as where the marker is placed — if the marker is just at a random location — the valley, or on the dungeon, or in a particular dungeon corner, or on the monster itself with a radius, so you're still never quite sure where it is — all of these work for any different kind of uh design you want. If you decide you really just wanted markers on the item or NPC, just put them on the item or NPC and put a small radius. If you decide — I don't really want to do that — put it outside the dungeon with a big radius and you have anything in between. Maybe you can.

Make some question Quest work a certain way and some work others, and the player can tell when they look like, oh, it's somewhere in that loc area, and then if the radius is really small, it can just go there. It is, that's the thing you want. If you wanted, you could even have the quest marker say something on it. So then the quest Giver can have it, say here's the monster, or can say the monster is anywhere in this Valley, even though they can see that it's a marker with a big radius. So that way the player who's playing doesn't have to guess what you were thinking. He can just look at the quest marker and go: oh the moner, somewhere in this Valley. One thing I would support — because I've seen this happen enough — is multiple markers for one Quest. So it might be: hey, you, have to find. This item, but it could be in any of these five Dungeons and it just marks all five Dungeons and as you go to each one, maybe it can remove those markers, or it may be.

I want you to go kill these five Bandits. It marks all five Bandits, maybe with the radius, and then as you kill them they get marked off.

The reason I think you should consider multiple markers per Quest is: I've seen enough good Quest designs that needed multiple markers and like radius. Since you put that under the player control, the uh Quest designer control. If they only need one marker, that's the default if. But if they need multiple markers, it supports it and multiple markers really come in when there's two cases: one where it could be in any of those locations, or one where you have to go to all those locations. So it could be.

Hey, gold may be found in any of these five mines, or it maybe I want you to go mine gold in all five of these mines to get the quest completion. So I think if I were to make a design today I would do any Quest can have. It defaults to one Quest marker but you can add more if you want. And it defaults to a small circular radius, but the questgiver can increase that if they want. I think that gives you the best of all worlds and if you're making your game and you don't know what you want, it can be specialized into one of any of the other types very easily. So if you decide I don't want multiple markers and I want them to be on the creature, keep the default of one. Don't use multiple markers.

Put them right on the creatures and give them a very tiny radius or, if you decide later, I want to use a smattering of all those you've got it available. It's basically a tool. Decide how you want to use it. So I hope that answers your question. Wes 9353.
