+++
title = "Fun vs. Realism"
date = "2023-10-24"
id = "TshXDFgfiTg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about game design: fun versus realism, and this has come up in the past."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about game design: fun versus realism, and this has come up in the past.

I've often said in other videos: I like, I like making games to be fun. I don't care about realism, I don't care about balance. I mean I do, but to me, fun is far more important and that's what I wanted to talk about. I want to talk about what I mean specifically in different parts of a game.

So let's start with movement. This is one that we can talk about, because everybody knows what realistic movement is. You know how high you can jump. You know how fast you can run. In almost every RPG, your character runs a lot faster than most humans and for a lot longer. You know way longer than Usain Bolt. You also jump Way High, higher from a stand still or a brawl jump. You jump way higher and way farther than most humans can do it I had an old boss who called this the joy of movement. He actually thought this was a good thing, that having unrealistic running and jumping was a good thing for a game, and I agree with them and this is an example of where a lot of people — they rarely — complain: hey, this is unrealistic, that my character can jump this far because it's fun and I love leading with this because I think it's the one area in an RPG I've never heard anyone say my character can jump unnaturally High. It ruined the game for me.

Never heard anyone say that, so obviously, at least in that I think everybody agrees: fun Trump's realism. But now let's talk hit points, because I've seen people, especially when monsters have a lot of hit points and people call them bullet sponges and they think it's unfun and realistic.

Let me tell you about when we were making Fallout and it was originally under gerps. The way gerps works, you have as many hit points as your health. At least Third Edition worked this way, which meant you started with around 10 hit points, maybe a few less, maybe a few more, and that's all you ever had D and D. You may start off with less than 10, although there's a number of classes that can start with a lot more than 10, but every time you go up a level you get more hit points, and that wasn't happening in our early versions of Fallout, and that was really hard to make the character feel like they were becoming progressively more powerful. The only way you had to do it was giving them better armor with better damage threshold and damage resistance, but that didn't feel like you. Um, yes, it, let you last a little longer in combat.

The other problem we were having was and I used to tell people this story all the time — was in D and D. When you're being attacked, it's like you have a lot of health and you get hit and you get hit again and you see again, and you get hit again and you see your health droing. You're like H, I may need to heal or maybe I need to run away.

That's not my experience with gerps. Gerps tended to be like this: I dodge and take nothing, I hit and I'm pretty much dead. I'm either almost dead or I'm pretty much dead and since your skills are reduced by the amount you took, anything you attempt to do after being hit that one time. Was that a huge penalty? So this was causing a lot of trouble in early Fallout.

Um, I remember somebody on the team said: you know when movies show Heroes shrugging off an injury, uh, either during or after combat. We're not having that experience here and I was like, yeah, yeah, so we were thinking about doing the optional ger, splitting health and um hit points into two and letting you buy up extra hit points and doing that like way past what the rules were going to allow. But in the end we went a different direction and follow. And then, finally, I talked about economy in a previous video and I talked about how hard it was to balance economies. And this is where the fund versus realism thing C comes in again, because in most RPGs, rewards are sources of money and wealth. You're given items, you're given gold directly, so that's a source coming in of wealth.

Well, all of the sinks, all the ways that you have that a designer puts in for a player to avoid paying money, a lot of them are the sinks that we put in to make the player play money. Pay money are often avoidable. You can make a character that doesn't use weapons like, or armor like, a monk, and now you don't have to pay for fixing those things if there's degradation, um, if you have to pay to sleep somewhere.

Some people just don't. Either they play on a simpler difficulty. Level doesn't require sleep or food, or they only sleep in their ship or their house or whatever. They try to avoid all the sinks that are in the game.

I'm okay with this because I'm trying to design a game that's fun, not a game that's realistic, and if people end up with a million coins at the end of the game, I don't really mind that much, and that pretty much is my big rule. My, top level rule is fun, Trump's realism, I believe. This so strongly. That was a, design pillar and I believe the first design pillar of The Outer Worlds, and I had to use that when people were arguing that, that they wanted to change something because they thought it was a little unrealistic, I'd always say, if it's fun, we're keeping it, because fun Trump's realism, if you're only arguing against something is this is unrealistic, we're keeping it.

Now, note that that doesn't mean that if rules are crazy, if they're hard to understand, especially if they're inconsistent, then you can make an argument for getting rid of them. But I would also argue that a lot of those kind of rules make the game not fun. If the game is too hard to predict what's going to happen and things are inconsistent, sometimes a rule applies and sometimes it doesn't. That's not fun, so fun seems to catch that. You know you.

Rarely have to bring it up and say, hey, you're being inconsistent here. I'm like I know, it's totally not fun. I also find that sometimes people get mad at a lack, of realism. But what they really mean is when realism hurts them, but they don't mind when it helps them, which seems a little Teensy bit hypocritical.

I'll give you an example. I think in Arcanum, when you stole an item, people just knew it was stolen. You know, that's why you had to go find a black market fence to sell things to. And people complain: well, how do they know it's stolen? How they magically know that that item is stolen? And I'm like: well, that's interesting, because that item you stole you save scum to get the lock picked and then as soon as you grab the item, you fast traveled away.

Neither of those things are realistic and I don't hear you complaining about those. So that's why I always did the fun trumps realism, because things can be fun if they help the player or get rid of drudgery. They can also be fun if they introduce some challenge. I don't care whether they're realistic, I just care whether it's fun. In fact, if I had to make a list, fun would be first, realism, probably in my top five. It might be third or fourth. It's in my top five but it's not up there. It's not, I'm sure, certainly not second, I'm trying to think of what second would be, but it's not realism. I rarely even have this discussion when we're talking about the science, weapons in The Outer Worlds.

Certainly real is. M didn't factor into those. I wasn't like hm anti-gravity gun. I don't think so. It was. This is fun.

This shrinks people the whole face. Rearranger one was just started as a joke and now it's a science weapon in the shipped game. I love that, so for all you people who are embarking on game design, here's my recommendation. One: make your rules and stick to them. Don't necessarily worry about whether those rules are realistic and don't worry about whether they're Pro or anti player. Don't worry whether this rule is something that helps the player out or this rule is something that will challenge the player. Don't worry about that, just worry.

Is this rule fun? Will the player have fun with this? Make sure all your rules are consistent. Don't do something like the — this works for the player, but NPCs — it doesn't work for the NPCs. I — there are some things I get around on that like it's fun to knock a NPC out, but it's not fun to knock a player out. So even though that's a little inconsistent, I allow It's mostly things like: if this is a place the player can get to the, NPC should be able to get there too. Um, I don't like the player being able to climb up to something and then attack things from that perch and other people can't get to them. So I like consistency, but — and here's where my big caveat — and I talked about this on safe scumming and player hoarding and, um, when people ask about whether I I disliked speedr running, here's my role. I want players to explore the world. I created with those roles, which were made to be fun and consistent. I want you to explore that world and have fun with it and if you discover an exploit, have fun with it I like exploits.

I'm more worried about a player not being able to reach the. End of my story line in my RPG with a valid character. I'm much more worried about that than a player reaching the end of the storyline with a million coins or having robbed every single vendor along the way, or them finding a way to make all the factions love them and then they get a very strange ending.

I'm fine with all that. I think I think it's fun and I think it's funny and I think if players love it they should do more of it. But the bottom line is, if you're designing a game, you should always be thinking: is this fun? Everything else? Secondary and realism, tertiary, quinary, — oh well, those are my thoughts on fun and realism.
