+++
title = "Eight Level Design Guidelines"
date = "2026-04-15"
id = "TWti2_bVsNM"
status = "production"
tags = ["Level Design", "Quest Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about eight level design guidelines."
references = ["MiAEBpXlelk"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about eight level design guidelines.

I don't talk about level design much on this channel. I do have a level design playlist, which this will go on. And the reason for that is: like art, I don't do level design very much.

However, as a game director, you are frequently expected to give guidelines to everyone on your team, not just people whose jobs you've done before. This is what happened in this one. I was asked to give some guidelines for what I wanted as level design. I think this was for The Outer Worlds, but it was based on something I had written back at uh Carbine for WildStar. I wanted to make a top 10 list. I always like doing things in like, you know, top five or top 10, but I only came up with eight. So these are the eight you're going to get. And I know that sounds disappointing, but if you have played any of my games, you know I'm not afraid to disappoint. People. Anyway, here we go. These are the most important details to remember and to include in every map of our game. Rule one: our game is nonlinear. Don't assume that players will go somewhere first or talk to someone first. What this means is — I wanted to remind level designers that just because you put a guard outside the town, don't assume that everybody will stop and talk to that guard. If you want to force that, you can put a gate in the town that doesn't open until you talk to the guard, or worse, force the guard to go into conversation with the player. But I point out that if you're capable of shooting that guard from long distance and killing them, I'm gonna go into that town without talking to the guard. And you may think: well, at that point it's okay, because everyone in the town will attack you.

In general, I just like to remind level designers: don't assume anything the player is going to do in a particular order. Your job is to provide a nice map for them to play on and not make such assumptions. So, number two, remember that all of our playthrough builds — and there's a link to where I listed all the different major types — Remember that all of our playthrough builds must be supported on the main story quests, all of them. This was because I can't tell you the number of times I would go back and go where's the stealth path through this?

Is there somebody I can talk to? Where's my conversation guy going to go through this area? And I frequently got pushback from people saying, "Well, we didn't really want to support it here. It didn't make sense that you could stop and talk to somebody". I'm like "Hey, this is a main story quest. Either this is where they pick it up, or this is one of the objectives, or this is where they turn it in. It has to be supported here. That is not an option", now, keep in mind that's usually work done by a narrative designer, but the level designer has to support it. They have to put somebody in. They have to make sure that NPC is somewhere they can be talked to without having to fight people to get to them. Because I've seen people put in vents saying "Well, there's a vent for the stealth guy and it's behind the guards and there's no way to stealth past them with the way the stealth radius worked".

So those things would have to be fixed. And then the third rule: side quests only need to support a few playthrough builds, but keep them balanced so that every playthrough build has some side quest for it. This is something where I was really happy to see.

Um, like on Pillars of Eternity, Josh kept track of all the places the player could use a skill, because shortly before we closed down and stopped adding content, he found an imbalance between [clears throat] where all those skills were used, and asked for additional content to be added to support those skills specifically. And because we'd all played through it. There were even places people suggested where we could do those skills.

For this case, it's hey, if you're playing a stealth person, you can't necessarily guarantee that every side quest has a stealth path. But if all of the side quests have a combat solution, half of them have a talk solution and only 10% have a stealth solution, that's a problem. You need a lot more stealth side quests, or side quests that support a stealth playthrough. Number four and related: leave room for side quests on main maps. This means don't fill up every cave, every building and every outdoor area with an encounter. And an encounter doesn't mean necessarily a combat encounter.

It could be like, "Oh, we have a merchant here, or there's some loot to find in here". Bear in mind that people are going to make a pass through later and may need to add a side quest. We may find, hey, there aren't really any good side quests on this map, or there's no side quests that stealth people can do. So there needs to be some space to do that. And those side quests may not fill up all those spaces. But breathing spaces are nice too, Places where the player can just stand and they're not forced to make a decision about anything, or maybe they just want to.

Enjoy the view. Rule five: at least one point of interest: POI for short — should be visible from any point on an outdoor map. This was something that I learned from Disneyland. And I'll link that video below of everything I wanted to everything I learned from Disneyland. When you're in Disneyland, you can often see POIs, whether it's the castle or the Matterhorn, Sometimes even when you're in areas that it doesn't make sense, like when you're in Adventureland and you can see the Matterhorn, and you're at Tomorrowland and you can see the Matterhorn. But the point is, having a POI that's visible on an outdoor map helps a lot of people orient themselves. Some people are just not that good at looking around and figuring out where they are, or even looking at a top — down map and going "Oh, I know I'm, I see I'm exactly there". But if they see a giant mountain and they're like, "Oh, the village is at the base of a mountain, I know at least a direction to go in, or I'm supposed to follow a river down from that mountain, Well, guess what, There's the mountain. They know how to orient themselves, and those POIs can be anything from a mountain to a really tall structure or a building or something that appears in the skybox.

That's unmoving, Um, you know, like something just floating up in the sky. So POIs can come in all kinds of flavors and types, but just make sure that when you're on an outdoor map and the player looks around, they can see at least one. Two or three would be great, but at least one. And then rule six was about encounters. And I said encounter should always come in at least two types: one anchored. An anchored encounter is the encounter occurs on or near a visible thing on the map, ruins, a vehicle, a village. It could even be like a dead body of some kind.

Anchored encounters can be multiple creatures. You could have it be a group of bandits, You could have it be a bunch of scientists, It could be a roving, you know, bunch of creatures like hyenas or something, and they're all, just you know, walking around this area. That's an anchored encounter. It's attached visually and maybe even conceptually to a thing on the map. Then there's non-anchored encounters, the other type. These are creatures that move around, They wander an area. Usually it's one creature, It can be two. I tried to discourage having large groups of creatures that moved around for a lot of reasons.

One, it was taxing on the pathing system and the um, it was hard to make a large group of people who walked look good. Sometimes they'd be too much in sync or they'd become a conga line of, oh look, they're those soldiers and they're walking a conga line down the road.

So for the non-anchored ones I said: make it one or maybe two. Plus, because they're not anchored the player was more likely to trip over them. And if it was a large group that was a bigger chance for a player wipe. So I basically said: try to keep the non-anchored encounters smaller. And then, rule seven: there should be rewarding exploration, meaning I can find places, people and items that are part of no quest line, main or side. Frequently this is — you know about this — You climb, you find a bunch of ledges and you climb up to a tall point and there's a loot chest. That is the most basic kind of rewarded. Exploration. Sometimes it can be a view, um, or an achievement. To get that view like this, You can now see the entire zone, Achievement, Um. Sometimes there's somebody up there, maybe not even a quest giver, maybe there's this: you've met the hermit of the mountain and he sits on the top, highest point of this mountain on some ledge. You can do whatever you want with the hermit. He's not there to give a quest, He's just there. Sometimes it might be a place, there may be a cave. There's no side quest or main quest that leads to that cave. There can be a little adventure in the cave, maybe there even is some loot, but nothing will ever lead you there.

You found it because you explored. And I always said: keep some areas on maps for places like that. And then the eighth rule. The last rule was NPCs that move along regular paths are predictable and these are better to use for stealth paths than NPCs that randomly walk around. In general, there are two ways we could do things in our maps. You could drop down a creature and then mark a set of spline points and that's where they walk along. And then when they get to the end, you could. There could be a flag either saying go back when you get to the last point, go back to the first. So it walked in a circle, or when you get to the end, turn around and go back.

There are a lot of other flags like how close you had to get to each point, like do they have to go exactly to the point? They have to generally get in that point's area. Then they mark that point as gotten to and they go on to the next.

One. There's a whole bunch of things you can do with paths. But there's another way where you can just drop an NPC and say: "Here's a radius, You're allowed to move around anywhere in that radius from that point". If that radius is zero, then you just have somebody who stands there and never moves. But as that radius gets bigger and bigger, the NPC walks around. Well, if a player is trying to stealth, the ones that move along splines are way easier to predict than the ones that just move randomly around in that area. So if that's an area where a stealth person probably has to do something, try to keep NPCs moving along paths or not moving at all, as opposed to if it's just a combat encounter, there's a bandit camp or a bunch of wild animals that live in a field, then you can put them as they randomly walk around in an area.

Okay, those were my eight guidelines. I never had shared these and it's because, since I wanted to make 10, I was waiting to get to 10 and then we started making maps before I ever shared this and then it felt too late and what's the point? And people are making maps already and they already knew what they were doing. So I never ended up sharing this, but I just shared it with you. So I hope you found those eight guidelines for doing level design useful.
