+++
title = "A Chat With Scott Campbell"
date = "2023-07-01"
id = "u0clHu19vCE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Interviews and Chats", "Fallout"]
summary = "I chat with Scott Campbell, the original lead designer on Fallout. Scott left Interplay in late 1995 (which we discuss) and was replaced by the equally talented Chris Taylor, whose game Stonekeep had just shipped."
references = []
+++

Tim, today I'm talking with Scott Campbell, the original lead designer, Fallout. We're going to talk about Fallout things and what he's been up to for the last forever. Yeah, seven years. Yeah, long long time, so you were the, you were one of the earliest team members on Fallout. You started on the team, I would think right after the two jasons. You know, uh, that was when I officially started. But uh, yeah, I mean since, like you know, even when we were just, like you know, playing gurps just for fun, after hours, you know I was, I was there, um, but even then, um, you know, I I have an actual trivia question for you, Tim. Do you remember the first time we met? Do you remember this?

Was I still a contractor? Um, what was I full time? Was I sitting in a hallway? Uh, you, had an office, but, just so you know, this is before the Fitch Building.

Susan, yes, I guess I fail. I met you at the Susan building, so check this out. So this is like this out, check this out. So this is like 91 sometime, right. And uh, Jeremy Barnes, you remember Jeremy Barnes?

Uh, so I, one of my like high school best buddies, right. So, um, he, uh, you know, uh, met with uh Chris Taylor and the two of them were playing, uh, Warhammer 40K, and so they invited me to come by this place called interplay and play Warhammer 40K. And so I show up with some Miniatures and such, and Rusty buchert's there — first time I ever met him, you know, and he's like in his like leathers and you know, and all that stuff looking like tough, and Scott everetts is there, right, and so we all play, you know, Warhammer 40K and I'm just like in awe of the place.

It's Susan, right, because it had all those, um, you know. Movie posters along the walls and everything else. And it was like, oh my gosh, the actual office where people make games and um. So anyway, one of the posters was of The Bard's Tale and I remember just with Rusty I was just geeking out saying, oh my God, I love Barksdale so much. And he's like, oh, hold on, let me, let me show you someone. And we walked down some Hall and he knocks on the door and it was your office. And he opens up the door and he's like, hey, Tim, uh, you know, this guy loves Bart's tail. And I walk in and I was like, ah, you're working on Barnes Hill Construction Set, oh my goodness. And you were just like the nicest guy ever.

You're like, hey, come and take a look at this thing. And I'm just like, but the one thing I remember is you. Know you were showing off that. You know, oh, yeah, you can make your own stuff. And you know, create your own like enemies, and you know your own, you know plots and party members, all that cool stuff.

But in the screen of like the, maze, um, of like the, dungeon and stuff, I remember, uh, even though it was only EGA at the time, it was like the colors were like kind of brown and hot pink and lime green, and I remember going, um, so what kind of area is this? You're like, oh, it's a dungeon, and I'm like, um. And that was when you said, oh, by the way, I'm colorblind, and I was like, ah, got it's okay.

Now all the pieces came into place. Yeah, I think he was the art director and he had me make some changes. Apparently it was super ugly. What I put together.

Oh, that's funny. Oh, toddka Master, you know why, when I, when I first, uh, went into interview at interplay, um, I, I was gonna be an artist and so I interviewed with Todd camusta and uh, yeah, man, that dude, I mean just total Legend, this guy, right, you know. But, um, he was going off to lunch when, uh, you know, I showed up and he's like all right, he sits me down in front of his, like you know, um, uh, apple 2gs with like a heat page or whatever, and says: I'll be gone for an hour or so, I'll make something, and he leaves, and so I'm sitting there, like you know, furiously clicking out pixels, like going, okay, I gotta make something and he something, I gotta make something. And he comes back from lunch he kind of looks at what I did. It was, like, yeah, you know, that's, pretty good, but you know, maybe maybe something like this. And he sits down and I, I swear to God, he just like grabs like the biggest brush possible and goes click, smaller brush, click. And just like, within five minutes, it's this like Master work and I'm just going: are you kidding me?

And so, anyway, I didn't get the job. Yeah, needless to say, so, uh, I, uh I left and I was like: and so I run into Jeremy and he's like: so did you get the job? And I'm like no, and he's like, oh well, you should totally talk to Rusty because he's headed QA. And I was like, really, he's like yeah. So I went up and I talked to Rusty and pretty much got the job: Jeremy Barnes and up, head of QA.

Uh, yes, he did. Um, and when he left interplay, uh, he actually formed his own, uh, two-way group, uh, his own company, and uh did that for quite a while actually. Um, so, uh, yeah, good old Jeremy, uh, but uh, the another funny story is the reason why they were hiring um at um interplay for play test was because Fergus urquhart was leaving QA to go back to college and they needed someone to take a spot and that's what I did. So Fergus was my QA guy on Bard's Tale and then he went back to UCSD and then he came back. He was an assistant producer, then an associate producer, another producer and then he was running the division that all it was going to go into. It was crazy there was that that company was so Dynamic — that's a good word for it, dude — as far as like turnover and stuff. I mean seriously like well. I was in QA for I think like four and a half months or something like that, before Bill Dugan wheeze, you can't, you'll do it again.

I'm sorry, Bill, if you're watching. Sorry. I'm sorry, Bill, if you're watching this. I I never meant to say uh, that name, but uh, but yeah, um, hold on, I'm getting a call. Oh, wait, call um, and uh, anyway, he uh needed a uh, uh, he had a bunch of projects as a producer that he didn't really want to do, um, so he needed someone to kind of voice them off on. And so he just came into play test and was like: you come with me, and I became a assistant producer, like you know, overnight. So, uh, such a formal process. I know you know it's funny. I still tell people that say to me: you know that they want to get into you know they want to get into the game industry.

What should they do? And I was like, well, QA or intern, you know, really, just be there and be in the development process. You know, and, uh, you know, I'm always like, you know what you have to do is you just have to, you know, always be the person. That is the solution and not the problem, right? You know you're always like, Hey, what can i do? How can I help?

And that everyone will remember you, right. And so when they think, hey, who can we get in this role, they're like, oh, that dude that was always there and always was like, hey, how can I help? Let's get him so well like Tom Decker would have.

He was the original producer for Fallout, but he had 22 other product skus and so Alan Palace. Was just like, oh, just right up the reports yourself, you'll be the producer now. And I was like, yup, but I'm making the engine and working on the design and I've got all these done and I don't even have an assistant producer. He goes, you don't need one.

Yep, you'll be fine. Is you'll cover it's fine.

Yeah, you started, well, you were at the — uh, the evening Pizza meetings, right, oh, yeah, because you weren't allowed to technically work with me. You know if that was the weirdest thing too? I mean because, like, um, I am, even though I was, like I felt like I was a part of Fallout from like the start, it still I wasn't officially on for like quite a while.

Nobody was. I was actually told I wasn't allowed to have anybody. Yeah, the weirdest thing, weirdest thing, but uh, but yeah, man, I got in trouble.

After the first pizza meeting, sort of somebody said: hey, I thought you weren't supposed to be pulling people off other projects. I'm like it was after six, I bought pizza myself. Nobody had to be there, they could have gone home. And so Alan was like all right, all right, I'm like I'm gonna do it again. I I checked my notes. I remember us doing it twice. This is why, by the way, I'm so glad I kept so many notes. We did it at least four times and maybe five.

It's a little unclear. I think we had five, but I kept writing after the fourth notes because it went. The notes of the fourth meeting are really long and they get weird in the middle, so I think we restarted. Ah, those were insane ideas we had too, because I saw your write-up.

Um, was it at? No mutants loud, no mutants allowed? Yep, and you wrote that crazy dinosaur time travel monsters.

That's exactly what I remember, I remember. So the crazy thing is, I remember you guys. I was not at that particular meeting, but what I missed, but I seem to recall you guys said that you were at the harp of all places and you were, you know, and just like the ideas were just flowing and um, but all of this came from this. One thing I actually did kind of want to touch on for the Fallout stuff was, you know, specifically for groups, right, like you know how, do you make a game that can encapsulate everything that is gerps? Right, with a generic system that can be any genre, right? So how do you make a game for that, right? Um, and uh, the idea of, like you know, having the time travel, the. You know, starting off with like the, lovecraftian horror, and going to the dinosaur age and then the cyberpunk with, you know, dinosaur detective in the war. In there it was just — I think it was Q, the producer, Michael Kors, I think you came to me and said: what are you thinking? You're insane?

Just because the engine, just because grips can handle anything, doesn't mean you have to make it have everything. He said: pull it back, and I was like we don't wanna. And he was like you're not gonna get, this is not going to get approved. So we went back to the drawing board. Yeah, I remember we talked about aliens for a while. It was, but you know, okay, so I know we're jumping ahead.

Um, though, uh, you know, I remember seeing uh, one of your videos, uh, about, uh, all the times that you know Fallout was. Almost canceled, right, and I remember there was this one part one other time that you didn't quite mention and you forgotten, if I didn't write it down, so it wasn't work very well. It wasn't that fall, it would have necessarily been canceled, but it was the. It was the. You know what we were going for. That eventually became Fallout could have completely changed. So, uh, let me, let me take you back for a second right, so at this time, you know what we're just talking about with, like, you know, how do you make a group's game, right, um, so someone — and I want to say it was Chris Taylor, but I honestly don't remember — remember, um said, hey, uh, gurpp, Steve Jackson games is coming out with a gurps uh, survival, uh book, right, and it was all about like post-apocalyptic stuff and you know, radioactive damage, blah. Right and so um we're like oh my gosh during a play made Wasteland and we're like wouldn't that be the most awesome thing to make a gurps wasteland we're like holy [__] that's something so you know immediately we were we were just like oh my gosh you'd get like the guardian Citadel in there we can get you know all the you know the Rangers and all the good stuff right and so um I was going crazy with that thinking of all sorts of ideas but this was just before uh Christmas break of 94. And I remember we were all sitting in a room and we were so jazzed about this idea we're making gerps Wasteland hell yeah right you know the spiritual successor to Wasteland but with the gerps thing big RPG and um so dick leerberg knocks on the door and says oh hey everyone you know, Merry Christmas, you know I'm taking off, have a good holiday, and stuff like that.

And he turns to leave and does the total like Colombo thing — ah, one more thing, you know, kind of right. And he's like: oh, by the way, I just got off the phone with EA and they still own the rights to Wasteland, so you can't do that, have a good Christmas. And then he left and I remember all of us were just like: are you kidding me? So we had all the plans all set and everything was going great. And then it was just like you can't do it. And so we're like God damn it. And I remember you know the we were like: well, I guess we have to go back to the drawing board. And literally like an hour or two later we all left for our, Christmas break. And I remember thinking over that entire Christmas break: God damn it, what are we gonna do?

I mean sure we had the idea of, like you know, the aliens taking over the world and you know all sorts of neat ideas, but like they're just nothing like really like screamed like this has to be made. And then at the end of the day I remember thinking you know how much I just that idea like you know post-apocalyptic, you know gerbs just like called to me right, and I was like you know what screwy. And so I remember coming back with such a fire in my gut in the first meeting we had. I basically said you know what screwier, we're doing it, but we're gonna make our own thing right. And that was, at least in my mind, right. That was kind of like the, even before it was called Fallout or anything else, even.

Before you know. Uh, you know, when we were still working on gurps, right, that was like the thing. It's like we're gonna do our own post-apocalyptic thing.

Well, that was. I mean, the executable was called gerp cxe and I think it was the one with the grass and the trees and a little night walking around and, uh, or Jason Anderson was like what art do you want? I'm like I don't know, go make me a night.

Um, by the way, I found out years later — and that's a video story I'm gonna do later because it's got a lot of background. I found out years later.

EA never, ever intended do have interplay, get the license, what really? Yep, from very high up in the chain. So, and I was like I, I found out that years later, but I remember thinking sometimes, Leonard and I talk about all the bullets. We dodged — like if we had gotten Wasteland we never would have made this.

It's true, and you know what? This is pretty good, yeah, um. Yes, I mean here's the thing that blew me away, and I remember this is why I'm so glad I kept notes. I'm gonna embarrass you too, oh, all right, bring it on. I have notes from 95 that already have, I think early 95.

Junktown, The Hub, Acropolis, all the places people love, Katie sins, the glow, you name it. Yeah, you've already done all that. It was already done. I mean, they respected it I wouldn't say they were fully specked out, but there were already descriptions of like here's what, here's what's going to be there. Here's some ideas of how quests are going to go through there.

Here's some main characters that are there, the whole Killian versus, uh, Gizmo thing, and I'm just like this is just. I was like if you would ask me when we designed that stuff, I wouldn't have said, oh yeah, we had that by early 95.. I just said we were still thrashing around like a bunch of 20-somethings that didn't know what we wanted to do, but we were actually kind of on the ball back then. Yes, indeed, we were.

Um, I mean it's uh, honestly, you know, like out of all these years I've been a of, out of all these years I've been a designer and stuff I mean, um, Fallout was really my, uh, my first like actual, like real design job where it's just like I got like you know, uh, you know, all the kid gloves came off and it was just like: do whatever you want and uh, I only had that a couple of more times in my career. I was thankfully lucky enough to get that a few more times, but Fallout was the first. And uh, I think you know my, entire design philosophy was kind of created by those early days of Fallout, where, you know in my mind, uh, it's all about designing up front right, figuring out what it is that you're going to be making before you start investing tons of money into art and engineering and everything else. So, make a setting, you make a story, you make your mechanics — yep, figure out what, find the fun before you do anything else.

Right, what is it what? What is it that you're trying to tell? What emotions are you trying to elicit from the player? You know why are they going to want to pick this up right, and then, once you have that core, that can be interesting and entertaining. Then you can build off of that, right, but it is.

Interesting that we had — we had — very little supervision. Nobody was watching us. I wasn't reporting. I would just say we did some things this week but nobody was like: have you have you made game pillars yet? Have you have you decided on an art style, like the X statement of your game? Yeah, yes, what are your main thematic Expressions?

We're just like: hey, I thought this was fun, let's do this. But here's where my notes get a little vague. I remember us talking about setting, when did we actually come up with that story? You mean the story of the actual like Vault, The Vault, the water chip breaks. You go out. I will tell you, because I I definitely remember this. So, right after our Christmas break that I just mentioned, right, um, you had told me in your office that you had this dream right and the dream had to. Do with this like massive, um, like you know, underground bunker, right. And you, I mean, I'm going to show you almost everything to you, because literally, this is a thing that made me go. Are you kidding me? This is the coolest idea ever.

Um, that you had a bunch of people surviving in this shelter right when all the bombs fell and all the horrible stuff, and they have no idea of what is outside. And I'm just like, oh my God, that is the coolest idea for a story ever. And so then I literally took it and ran right and so the water chip idea that I mean, I don't even think that's a great idea, but it was just like: how do we get them out of the Vault?

Why would they ever want to leave if all they're told from literally Generations is: oh, there's just horrible things. Out there, why would they want to go? So I'm like, well, something has to break, and if something breaks they have to find something. They won't be able to build it, so they have to find something. So where would this thing be? We'll eat another Vault, so they'll basically have to go and find it from another while, okay, cool, and that was like the, emphasis right, I must have eaten so much ham over Christmas. Members coming up with the that it was a water purification chip because I talked to him.

It's weird. I mean I wish I had written all this down. I basically my notes go from us discussing setting and genre to us making vaults and those areas I mentioned, junktown of the Hub decompasses.

I'm like, when did that happen? And I guess right after Christmas. I guess early, 95.. Yep, I mean honestly, um. I, uh, I went a little crazy. I mean I, I made a huge document of just nothing but just like all of my just total brain dump of stuff and uh, Brian friermuth uh helped me out considerably on, uh, a lot of this stuff and uh, we had a ton of ideas and honestly I'd say you know, probably about a third of those ideas that we wrote up didn't even make it into the final game.

You guys were very — the word now would be passionate. Yes, back then you were a little crazy. I still remember your original Sprite design — I know I told you about this — the one that had, oh yes, you wanted us to build 2D Sprites from pieces of torso, arms, legs, head, so no matter what armor you had or what weapon, it would build it up in a sort of quasi-z buffered Sprite.

Yes, reaction, oh my God, yes, and you know what? I've told this to other artists before and, uh, they all told me: no, no, there's no one hell, no, no, I'd never want to do anything like that. Because you know, it's like the idea of like creating, you know, artistically creating a character, that's one thing, but saying, all right, you're gonna make a head right and that head is gonna be interchangeable on all these different bodies and it's like, and every pose, with any weapon. And I remember even thinking, well, how are the arms gonna work? Because you hold a gun like this, but you hold a spear like this and you're like: well, figure it out.

And I remember, until then I had never seen that look on Leonard's face, on anyone else. But rusty, Buick had a stress face. He would get where there'd be a vein here. And he'd start to turn red and he'd get flustered and go, ah, Leonard had that, had a Buick face.

That's it I believe he remembers that too, as just a, like I cannot, I cannot do this, it cannot be done. You're asking the impossible and I was like I was trying to figure out: is it impossible or just hard, because we're gonna do some hard stuff. Yeah, I mean I I had made, uh, I mean that I had made like a little demo of uh, of that like running. You know, I had like a little 3D character I made in 3D Studio, yeah, before it was called 3D Studio Max, I think it was just literally like 3D Studio Version four or something like that. And uh, you know everybody Studio men, yeah, exactly, and you know I was able to show like, okay, cool, look here.

Here's kind of like how it goes. And here's, you know the order in which we draw things, but it was ridiculously complicated. And then, you know, because of the anti-aliasing and such at the time, right, you know, since we really didn't have it and to try to compute that Alpha channel was just ridiculously hard, it was so hard to do with, like Sprites and overlapping stuff. I mean I could, I, I mean, at the end of the day, I could totally see where he was coming from and, uh, I think what he eventually settled on um was at absolutely the right thing for the game, even though we had to cut out a lot of things. I wanted to do um, yeah, best decision. And that was a good example, though, of You did more than just design. You put art together. You made that, uh, vehicle editor, just because. Because — because I said I was, I said I'm not gonna do — I did the character editor, I'm done.

Yeah, I have to work on code for a game now and you're like I'm gonna put all the vehicle rules in gerp's vehicle. Yeah, that was a dumb idea. I mean, that was an immense editor. That was the most amount of time I have ever put on any sort of interface, because, uh, I see me, I thought, oh, it's just gonna be easy. I, you know, put in some of these charts and a couple little rules and a couple little links, that'll be easy. No, no, the sheer amount of interface of like generating all the lists and, you know, being able to add the things, all the buttons and all the things, and making sure all the database works, and it was so much work, um, but I got really. Really familiar with your uh, your uh, um windowing system. What is It was at all. You know that's right, because you can always in Fallout, can always in Starfleet Academy and Max and Sim Earth and SimCity 2000 and the?

Um, jeremy Barnes, when he found out that all of the bios for the group's character editor were external, that we just read them out of text files, so like I had done the basic set and there were spells and skills and um advantages and disadvantages, he's like: wait, I can just do whatever I want. And he and like some people in QA, took those books to Jackson, gave us and they did like magic and horror and Cliffhanger, just all of them. And — and I have, I still have a lot of these files of just burps, some genre or some World Book, they went insane.

Yes, they did in fact. Go insane, but that was a weird time and I tried to explain to people. Now we were this weird passionate boundary lists. I used to tell people I go to interplay at two in the morning like I'd be driving back from somewhere like LA or something, and I go, I'll swing by interplay. There's only a few blocks from where I lived. I see a light on.

I'd seen off somebody there, was somebody who's in their office sometimes I went in. I'm like I just want to know who's here it was. It was weird and it was often one of you guys: you or Jeremy or Chris Taylor or Scotty or just someone just doing something. Sometimes you guys are just in the conference room because your game went on too long of whatever you were playing that night.

Yeah, and no one wanted to Forfeit. You all wanted.

To be the winner, so it was like two in the morning. You're like we'll be over in another two rounds, three rounds, I'm sure, and I'm like, yeah, you guys, I'll see you here in the morning.

Uh, good times, good it was. It was, it was a family, is what it was, right, you know? And uh it was. It was like the best kind of family because we were all in love with what we were doing. Right, you know, we were all passionate about, you know, not just the work, but like what it meant and what it represented. We were excited about it.

Yeah, you know, and like I mean, you know, speaking at least for myself, you know it's like I had spent literally all of my life in love with video games. And to actually be at a place where not only do I get to do that- 24. Hours a day, but I get to hang out with other people that are just as interested in it as I am. I mean, that's, that was just magic to me. I've talked with so many people about like what made Fallout magical and also how we avoided like, multiple cancellations and just like the, pizza meetings that I had to get people after hours and all this. But the one thing that I think we haven't never — Leonard and I, we talk about this a lot and we never really thought of until I said I think it was and we got lucky because we all did this week, somebody could have an idea and we could talk it through rather than just go that's dumb.

Nobody ever went that's dumb. They went okay, so you want to build up Sprites from 512 various pieces?

Now let's talk about what that would mean, how. Many would what that would mean? How many pieces, how many would we need? And how would we handle male and female characters, and are we going to have different races and are we gonna have different heights and will there be fat people and skinny people? And how many weapons are we going to have and how many armor? And we start doing the math. We, instead of just going no but, and we did that for everything, we did that for like, oh, I want to make a Zone, I want to make a, map for you know, this kind of area. I want these kind of people.

They're trying to farm, they're just trying to survive, but these people made, you know, hold up in a junkyard, but these people have a big sprawling area and they even have water that they ship around to all the other people. And I'm like we talked about those things and then said, okay, let's do It's funny because I — I don't know how much of that is just, you know, ignorance on our behalf of how hard everything really is, or you know that we were just like, we were just so passionate about it that we decided, you know, we'll, figure out a way to make it work, right, yeah, uh, but you know, at the end of the day, though, I mean all of us — we just wanted to make something that was awesome and, you know, almost more importantly, something that we want to play right, you know, and, uh, I think that was our goal, that was our rule. We liked, we liked making each other laugh, we liked each other going: oh, that's gonna be my new favorite feature. We all wanted to be the person that week, because I found notes and I had to correct Leonard. Leonard likes to say that Jason Anderson had the idea for companions and, according to my notes, Scott Campbell had the original idea for Companions and we talked it out and we realized we couldn't do it because a that was a lot of extra code and art and all this other stuff.

But also we were trying to make a game that was reactive to the player. And if you had a group — like if you tried to make a group that was fully controlled by the player, like Ultimus, lets you do — we were like, well, who's it going to react to? We want the player to make a decision, the game to react to it and the player has to look at the consequences. So we went: okay, it's just gonna be a player and it's. But it's funny because I told him when I found the notes I'm like no, Scott Campbell originally proposed that and we talked him out of it. So then later, when Jason talked a scripter into putting it in, I would you know. And then we had to suddenly try to make code and interfaces for it.

Well, you know, so, uh, so two things, uh, the. The first thing is, um, my, uh, my original design. I mean I, uh, I only have like some scattered notes and such. But, um, I was going a little insane on the things. I was originally hoping a little Fallout. So, beyond just the Sprites and stuff, you know, it's like I was so into like, uh, um, the ultimate games and like ultimate four and such like that. I mean I, I wanted to have every character in the game to be on their own schedule and like scheduling system and such, and have the player be able to, like, go up to them and interact with them and say like, hey, what are you doing?

Oh, I am in the process of moving from, you know, my home to my shop or you know whatever they're going to be doing. Right, and you could actually interject your own schedule and say, hey, can you meet me over here at this time? And then they would change their schedule at that time to go and meet you and, like, you could make what I wanted to do. Right, I wanted to be able to make any single person a companion or a love interest or, you know, a friend or you know whatever you could, just part of a quest. Yeah, all right, I mean so many, so many interesting ideas.

Right, you know, it's like I. I wanted the game, um, to start inside of the Vault, where you would actually take time to gather resources and potentially Companions and friends that you know you'd take out with you and you know stuff like that right. But um, again, at the end of the day, I think you know what Fallout — you know uh, shipped with and everything else was — was perfect for what. It was right, because you know when, you know again just left my own devices, I probably would have gone a little bit deeper into like you know um, you know kind of like experimental technology stuff that uh, we probably shouldn't have really been trying um, but I never really had. I was supposed to. Who said no?

Leonard said I was supposed to be the adult in the room and sometimes I was closer to the end. I was, but I was also just. I was also really excited about some of these ideas you had and I was.

Like, let's try. I still remember, because I was a big one and I went: moral stuff, I want moral dilemmas — yep, and I love the necropolis Dilemma of you can just walk in and take their chip — yep, but then they all die and you get that horrible slide. Or you can try to fix. They had a jury rigged purification system that they could use but it was broken. You could try to fix that but you didn't have to, and I just love that.

A lot of people, especially the first time they played it — like: I've got the chip, I'm not hanging around to do more work, I know what I have to do, and you take the chip back and they expected the game to end there and it doesn't. Yeah, they're like: oh, now you have to go get mutants. And then they forget all about necropolis and then that slide comes up at the end.

We're like I remember someone in QA got upset. He came to my office and he was upset. It was like you made me feel bad and I'm like, well, go back and play again.

That's the whole point. Go back and be a good person. He's like I will. He was almost like I'm gonna show you and I'm like, okay, but that's what we want you to do, that's the plan. You know that. That totally reminds me of the story.

Um, you know, like the idea that you know, from the beginning we wanted the player to basically have repercussions for their actions. Right, that they can, they can do anything, but you know, whatever it is that they do, for good or bad, there is going to be results, right. And like, uh, when we were, uh, creating the list of animations, for characters and things like this, um, we had, you know, you know here are the different body types, right, and uh, you know here are the different uh, uh, like, uh, action and reactions and things like that. And one of them — you know we're talking about the Heap of Gore technology TM, right, you know, people exploding like a blood sausage and all that other good stuff, right, uh, so, uh, you know I remember having these lists for, like, okay, mail, human, female, human, you know that. You know the Red Scorpion, blah blah, and I had children and they had all The Locomotion and all of the death bits. And I remember, you know Leonard coming up to me and going, uh, Scott, uh, I see you have here, uh, children being horribly maimed that exploded into pieces.

Uh, you sure you want to do that and I remember going you. Know he's right we're gonna get [__] for this um but you know I was just like you know what you know our rule is repercussions for your actions so yet you should be able to do anything but you know yeah like the child killer you know uh perk that you get uh that you know a reputation that uh then you know screws you through the entire game because you're a horrible person yeah that's exactly right you know I remember because I had to code a lot of the stuff we had enumerations for all those animation States and there was there was a pile of goo there was a pile of Ashes there was explode there was there was one more part of the body just blew off and you could see ribs yeah yeah I think it was just what was that called that one had its own animation because they do a little dance, yeah. And then because the overseer at the end — uh, I think it was tremel Isaac t-ray — he made a special animation for the death of that guy. That was so big, it exploded everywhere. A tooth came out, it was like one white pixel, that's all it was. But everybody saw that one, oh God, his tooth.

And then he starts crawling for the door and I remember just thinking: have we gone too far? And then I said no, we didn't, we didn't go too far, because people, you, that won't happen unless you, the player, make it happen exactly and it's because you want that at that moment. Right, and then when it happens, you feel satisfied, kind of dirty, but still satisfied. That's the one where someone came up to me and said: I can't believe this game.

Lets me shoot children. I'm like the game does not let you shoot children, yeah, and they're like: what should let me do that? And I'm like, but it the consequences are severe. I mean you that that child killer reputation — I think we spawned it like moved to the top of the random encounter list. It would spawn bounty hunters that would just yell how horrible you were and then start Keepers wouldn't want anything to do with you and yeah, yeah, and the ones that did would charge you an arm and a nose and they the whole time they'd be saying: you're an awful person, yeah, so there was no way you could have done that and not notice that the game was telling you: don't do this. I can't believe you did this. I've got to remember you did this. That's just too funny. Oh my gosh. Good times, good times. I want to talk about the elephant in the room.

All right, because the last note I have that has her name in it is in September of 95.. Yeah, and I remember you were leaving and I remember you were explaining you were leaving and I never understood it. And I will tell you now, and this is going to embarrass you: Leonard and I have repeatedly talked about all the trials and tribulations Fallout had, but we both agreed that when you left, we thought this thing might be over. No, you were important, well, you know, you're in the manual. We put a few names in his original Fallout design by: yeah, because we were afraid you wouldn't get any credit because the way interplay worked if you left, you're out of the credits and we're like not on this project.

Um, we had full control of the manual, which probably was bad in itself because it ended up being really long and spiral bound and way more pictures than it was really expensive manual. It was a fantastic manual. It was one of those manuals you put on your shelf.

Yeah, I have it right. Oh, there it is on my shelf. And, yeah, when you open it up, I was so happy your name was still in it because you had done so much stuff. But I kind of want you to. I'm really big enough.

I want people to tell their own stories. So you now tell stories for posterity, for recording, for everything. Why, you left Fallout, okay. So, uh, this is, uh, this requires a bit of Storytelling. So, uh, yes, uh, settle back, grab your Coco. Uh, yeah, here it comes, okay, so, um, let me, let me, like you know, kind of get from the beginning, right? So, um, I'm in QA, uh, at this time and I'm handed to this game, uh called Rags to Riches, um, and uh, so I'm doing some testing on it and uh, I find that you know, some of the interfaces uh, a little bit like kind of hard to get to because there's like a bunch of things I have to kind of Click around and stuff, and so I was like I wonder if you could consolidate some of these into just like one screen and blah. So I drew some stuff up and uh, I I was told that that you were the guy basically doing all the coding and Reading part. So I walked over to your desk and I'm like, hey, so, um, I had this idea and I slid you the piece of paper and you looked at it and they were just like, oh, and you're just like, this is amazing. And I remember you called me interface, God, or, and I was really good. Oh, you still have them, right, I wish I did, man, I wish I had anything from interplay. Um, I, I really don't.

It's, uh, it's been so long dude, so anyway, um, after that, you know, it's like you know, still playing. You know, after hours, you know all the my God, you're playing everything: DND, uh, Shadow run, uh, you know gurps and things like that. But when, uh, we were playing one time and we were talking about, uh, you know, wouldn't it be cool if we could get the gurps license? And we kind of joke like, yeah, it's not going to be possible, and they're like, well, wait a minute, how, hard would this actually be, right, you know, it's like, hey, maybe we should make some inquiries. And stuff, and um, I mean, I was not privy to how it happened until, like, I I heard, oh my God, I think we could actually get this thing, and it was like what That's, that's insanity, but I remember we were playing um different types of gerps games, trying to a familiarize herself with the system, but like also trying to think of like well, what could this game be right? And I remember, uh, you had, uh, this is so great, this one night, uh stand kind of Conan game. I'm trying to remember, if you remember, that the one entire party pretty much got wiped. Uh, that was your party. Did I read three parties through? And it was all different. It was a you went to some Wizard Tower and you were in The Dungeons.

Yes, I remember that. Yes, that was great. Um, but, uh, you know, I was in your group. Uh, I remember, uh, my God, it was myself, um, my soon-to-be wife at the time, uh, Melissa, and uh, it was, um, oh my gosh, Come on, Scott. Uh, it was, uh, Jason Taylor, I'm trying to remember who else. It was a fourth and I remember the. The fourth played this, you know, big, tough fighter with an intelligence of three or whatnot.

He was like, wasn't as smart as like a chimpanzee, and I forget what we called it was. It was, yeah, it was like thread or what. Uh, oh, my God, the whole thing. It's all coming back to me, but, um, that was great, uh, but we saw what the final goal was, but we didn't quite understand that that was the final goal, and so we're like that looks dangerous and so close the door and went another way. You weren't supposed to, and it was like a vault of Darkness, but there was some horrible Eldritch creature in there. Yeah, yes, and of course you know my character got grabbed and was being dragged away into the abyss. And since I was a spellcaster and in gurps, uh, you could Channel all sorts of energy and then intentionally fail, and if you critically fail, you could cause this big spectacular result, and so I was like I'm gonna blow this thing up. So, uh, I channeled all this energy and then critically failed, and all I did was caused a little late to go poof, which was enough to make the rest of the party see the horrible Eldritch thing and all go crazy and run away.

Yeah, yeah, good text. Anyways, one group did survive that dungeon. I will tell you now.

One of the three survived: I remember you telling us this, uh, and I was just like, ah, well, uh, so one of the games that I was running groups, wise um was um, based on, uh, Rogers, aladney, lordro's, alazany's, uh, uh, it was called Road marks. I don't know if you remembered or not, but I've read that crazy awesome book but it's this idea of like conventional road. Yeah, but it was. It was like time travel. You know, the farther you go down, one way it goes to like the beginnings of like all history, but at the end it's like kind of like the end of all history and all of the people traveling back and forth between it, from super high tech to like caveman, to alternate histories, to all sorts of stuff.

I was like what a cool idea for like a video game, especially using something like gerps, and so I ran a couple of these games. But then I found in my opinion, fatal flaw, which was how they handled uh, Tech levels, right, so like you could have a 100 Point character that could barely swing a sword, or you could have a hundred Point character with a gun that could pretty much take over the world, right, you know, and it was, it's just like, uh, you know, it's like you have a high-tech laser gun or you know a stone and that is everything right. So, and they did they never Point balance those very well.

Um, so it's like, okay that you know, because we had a couple of characters that were like modern characters, uh, in that scenario, time traveling scenario, but then one character in like power armor with a gun and nothing could touch him and you know, and everything was like completely dangerous to the uh, the other characters and anyway, I digress, so playing gurps, uh, in. The evening and uh, you know, uh, thinking about, you know, like, what are the, crazy things that you know kind of you know we could do, and that rolled into like, okay, we get the group's license and then like, what will we be making right? And then, you know, uh, group survival, uh became gurps, Wasteland. And then, uh, eventually, when Wasteland was taken, it was like man, hell of that. You know, we're just gonna make gerps. You know, survival, whatever, right, you know, we're post-apocalyptic game, right, um, and all the you know the writing and stuff that, uh, that went into that.

Well, at the time I was not officially on Fallout, um, I was, uh, I was working as, uh, you know, Bill Dugan's assistant producer, uh, making typing games. And uh, uh, Sim Earth was the big, uh, you know uh, project that I was given, simmerth, the CD-ROM version, and uh, um, yes, that was with Mark Harrison guy, I love that guy, Mark Harrison. He, uh, he, uh, uh, gave me my, uh, my first book of, uh, you know, C plus this giant Borland C plus book, um, and, uh, because, uh, up to that point, you know, I knew like basic, I knew Pascal, I knew a couple other things, but, uh, you know, knots, not C plus and so, uh, that was the book that I I taught myself anyway, um, so, the um in working on simmers, and this was a project that I was pretty much like it was another producer had it, that producer, uh, left the company and so I was literally given a, uh, this project that no one knew about, that had, I think, a budget of something like uh, two hundred thousand. Dollars or something like that, and a 150 of it was already spent and I had no idea on what right. And so they're like, okay, and here's the deadline, and make it. And so, uh, I had all these crazy ass ideas of things I wanted to do.

Um, I thought the coolest part of sim Earth was when you create your planet, um, certain uh species can actually become sepient and develop their own civilizations and do all sorts of cool stuff. And I was like, oh, that's so dope. I want to have an insight into what that actually looks like with like, if, like my little amphibians you know, become, you know, Stone Age amphibians of like, what does that look like?

So, um, Corey Comstock — I'm not sure if you remember him or not, remember the name, oh yeah, so he was, uh, he was a 3D artist working. Under, uh, Rob nestler at the time and uh, uh, he basically, uh, we were talking — I don't even remember the Genesis of it exactly — but he was like: hey, um, I'd love to give that a try. Maybe, you know, make like a little movie about that or something. And so I was like: all right, let's do it. So he comes back in like just a couple of days and he has this frog, this amazing looking frog. I mean, I made a, sketch of what I wanted these characters to look like, but he realized it all in 3D and made this movie and his animation skills were off the chart. And remember, this was at the time that, like, Jurassic Park had just come out, so like 3D stuff for games and all that. That wasn't even really a thing, also, rendering a frame took minutes, exactly right, and so. But he comes with his like entire movie of these frogs doing these crazy animated things and I was just like this is the most amazing thing I've ever seen and I'm like, all right, we're gonna have movies for not just frogs, for every period of civilization.

You know stone age, uh, Bronze Age. You know all the way up to, like, you know the information age, the atomic age, and you know beyond. But I want it for all the other species as well. You know, uh, reptiles, dinosaurs, avians, so we started doing this and we, at the end of the day, I think, made like 30 of these movies and some of them were just absolutely amazing. When, um, when Steven Spielberg, uh, came by interplay, um, uh, because, uh, what we didn't know at the time was that he was actually scouting for, uh, this little company called DreamWorks. That he was creating. Um, so he came by and he — Brian Fargo, specifically wanted to show him Corey comstock's frog animations, and apparently Steven Spielberg loved them, thought they were amazing, and sadly, what ended up happening was, uh, uh, Mr Comstock uh left interplay because he was hired by Dreamworks to work on this little movie that would later become Shrek. So Corey did all of the uh, the actual, uh, initial designs, uh, you know, character animations and stuff, I suppose, for Shrek, back when it was Chris Farley uh, doing Shrek.

Could I just interject and say Fargo brought Spielberg by my office. He wanted to see a programmer and I'm sitting at my desk and I'm just like: and Gilbert, I mean it was Steven Spielberg. He just looks, I don't know he's. I look up and I think it's Steven Spielberg, but think I think it's Steven. Spielberg, but I just went hello, and he goes, what are you doing? And I said coding, and he went, oh, and he kind of looked around the office and he went and he looked at a bookcase full of, like you know, computational geometry and c and just you know, boring, and he went, huh, and he left. I didn't get a job at DreamWorks, because programming looks boring. Yeah, yeah, programmers look boring.

Oh my God, that is Mark Harrison wasn't even in the room and he came in afterwards and I went: hey, you know, while you were out, Steven Spielberg came by and he goes: no, he didn't. I'm like no, he really did, and somebody next door stuck their head and said, yeah, he really did. I was in the bathroom, damn it.

That's too funny, well, needless to say, long, long story short, um, so uh. Mark Harrison and I, we were, you know, busy working on uh Sim earth when, uh, um, I get called into uh Alan pavlish's office and, uh, he basically says, hey, uh, so similarth is canceled. And uh, I was like what? And he's like, yeah, yeah, it's, uh, it's gone. And I'm like, well, is there anything I can do?

He's like no, and so all this hard work, you know, all this time and effort and all this excitement destroyed, right. So I immediately was like, well, huh, I feel like this. And uh, honestly, you know, it was like this was like the baby that I was gonna, you know, give birth to, and I was unhappy with that. However, what really made this the gut punch was that this came on the tail end of something called interplays 10th anniversary, and I'll have to tell you that story: the CD. Anthology, yes, uh, so this is when, you know, I was still, uh, um, a bill to Dugan's assistant producer and I was given this great idea. You know, it's like interplay had been around for 10 years, you know, been it's, you know it's 10th year anniversary was coming up and they wanted to have a game on a CD-ROM for each year it's been in business and, uh, great idea, um.

However, um, some of these older games wouldn't even work on the newer, you know, like os's and such like that right, and what was worse was that actually trying to find the source code was nigh impossible. I mean, I remember going into Troy worrell's office and he was the guy that was supposed to be, like the guy who kept all of the old code and everything else. So I remember opening up this, drawer, and there's just these loose. Floppy disks and I was like, uh, I'm having the archive, yeah, and I'm like I'm looking for like test times and tone town, and he's like, well, it's probably in there somewhere. And I'm like and like some of these discs aren't even like labeled and some of them are just like rubber band together and I'm like, ah, so I ended up going through all of these but me and uh and uh, um, Bill heinemann, uh, you know, we, uh, we worked our butts off on that thing because he, um, uh, I, uh, he, was busy working on another project but I needed someone that could understand, you know how to, uh, you know, like, you know, figure out like the assembly code for, like mine, Shadow and stuff like that.

And he was the only guy, um. So, uh, you know I, I literally was like paying him.

Under the table to work in his spare time to try to figure this out. But we're going through all these floppy disks trying to get all this stuff together. One crazy Side Story is that the code for Wasteland, the original code for Wasteland, was absent, gone completely, and so we were like, well, we need to rebuild this because it won't work on Modern systems. But we can't find it anywhere, and so luckily, bill, because he worked on the original Wasteland, had a backup on like an old floppy drive somewhere and actually, you know, resurrected it. Years later they lost the Fallout source code and asked me for it, even though they had threatened to sue me for having it after I left. I didn't have it, but luckily someone else had kept it.

Wow and but so Wasteland Fallout — several games would have been lost if people had not. Kept their own copies of it, so that happened a lot, insane, anyway, as The Story Goes. So Bill and I were killing ourselves.

So he's busy literally building these 10 different games. Uh, I am making an installer that, will, you know, install them all and I'm also creating digital manuals for each one of them because, remember, this was before, like PDFs and stuff like that, they'll all have to like handle manuals. Yeah, you could even scan the manuals, because OCR wasn't even a thing. So I literally had to type all the stuff in myself and do all the art you know, and, like you know, in 320 by 200 VGA, because, oh my god, dude, anyway, deep breath. So, uh, yes, all the traumas coming back. So, anyway, we only had four months to do this thing, right for us, and so we did it all. We got it done. We, you know, got it I mean, the manual was like an inch and a half thick. It was tremendous, um, but we got this thing out and um, so there was a company meeting a little time afterwards and it was an all hands meeting and yeah and uh, and you know, Brian Farrow goes up to the front of it and, uh, he, starts talking about, you know, the 10-year anniversary CD-ROM and he basically is like: yeah, this is, you know, it did really really well.

As a matter of fact, it was responsible for like 60 of the profits you know about that quarter or whatnot. It does is done really really well. And Bill and I we're like at the back, like corner of the room and we're looking at ourselves going hell, yeah, dude, yeah. And Brian's like, yeah, you know. And uh, yeah, he.

I'd like to thank the people that made this, you know, possible. And Bill and I were just like, hell yeah, we're gonna get you know some you know big gold star by her name. And then he calls, uh, Trish Wright and Kim Motika, the marketing people that to come up and they basically took 100 of the responsibility. And then bill and I are sitting in the back going, oh, oh, okay, yay, uh, any acknowledgment at all?

Nope, not a thing, so we were heartbroken and uh, then the nuts, not you know that. Far afterwards, uh, Sim City — I'm not sorry. Sim Earth got canceled, um, so Sim City is a whole nother story. Oh my God, the spending, uh, uh, like one and a quarter million dollars on a title where most all the other games that interplay had, like you know, budgets of like maybe a hundred thousand dollars. Well, you were there, that producer Summit, I remember you, um, when, uh, anyway, so at the end of the day, I truly believed that um, interplay wasn't going to be around much more. Um, when it was making its uh, uh moves with universal um, I was, you know, uh, you know, after hours and stuff, you know, kind of like uh talking with like dick leerberg and such like that, and he was giving me just like all of the inside dirt and you know, just going like you know if he was stressed out about everything you know, thinking that you know, oh, I don't know if this can happen, if this could work, and so I'm just thinking myself, damn man, uh, I, uh, I I mean I love this company, but you know, I, I don't know that it's going to be around um, so all of that is on my back.

Right and at the same time, um, you know, playing groups, uh, fallout, uh, well, what would be Fallout was just starting to actually be a thing which was like the brightest moment. Uh, at, you know, at the time, you know that were the brightest thing in my life. At the time it was just the thing I wanted, um, so, taking a real quick step back, so just after uh 10th anniversary, um, bill heinemann was working on um, uh, dissent. They called him in because there was like a network bug. I don't know if you remember this or not, but there was a um, a networking bug that like was just like a memory stumper, the worst kind of bug possible. And uh, he was called in to possibly help fix their Network code because it had something to do with the network traffic coming back and forth and like one packet at some time would get generated. That was like one bite too big or something like that.

Right, just the crazy thing, and I remember sitting at his desk with him and he was watching his monitor, like the freaking Matrix right, like all of the data just spilling down, and I remember him staring at it and he just puts his finger out and says, right there, and I'm like what's? And he's like, right there, that bite, right there. And he's like you know, because it was being overwritten. And uh, yeah, that was it I mean the dude Legend, legendary dude, anyway. So you know, he was a very, very good, uh friend of mine and uh, just afterwards, uh, he was talking about network security and stuff and he did something stupid, you know it, but he was trying to make a point where he like uh, got Brian. Fargo's uh password to his email and sent him a message from himself or something like that, to basically say, hey, we really need to work on security here at interplay. And for that he was fired and like just out the door, thrown out, and I'm like dude.

He was one of the founders of this company. He's done so much stuff. He was one of the guys that literally told me to: you know, maybe go get a job at interplay, um, you know, stuff like that. I mean that's, it's like you know, me and Bill, we were tight man and so all of that was just like dragging me down. And then so here comes, you know, the game that would be Fallout. I do all this design for it.

The team's coming together. I'm still not entirely sure whether or not we'd actually be able to make anything win. Out of the blue.

Bill heinemann calls me up and says, hey, Scott, how would you like a job? And I was like, really, he's like yeah. So it turns out: uh, I started up this company with, uh, with a, with a friend, and we have maybe a couple other people from interplay and, uh, we're making our own game studio called logic wear and we need someone that is basically a game director that can create and oversee any of the games that we make. And you know, we have this one particular game that we have, you know, potentially a, buyer for, and I was just like, this is, this is, you know, this is like the perfect opportunity, right, you know. And so, um, you know thinking, you know interplay, you know it's like, you know they wonderful, place.

But you know, I did feel kind of slighted. A little bit and, uh, I thought what they did with Bill was bad. And you know, uh, and I'm like God I'd love to work with this dude again. And you know the opportunity of you know having my own, you know, like uh say and uh be like, you know, creative director and stuff, hooray. And so, yeah, I I said all right, uh, I'll do everything I can possibly do. Uh, with Fallout, you know as much story and as much brain dump as I possibly can get it all done on paper, turn it over and then say peace out. I remember us talking on the balcony that you were gonna leave and I just remember being like — because from my point of view it was like we're all super excited we were doing all this stuff, it was all starting to come together. We were actually seeing levels being made. We didn't have a scripting language yet, but the Primitive AI was in and stuff. And then you're like I have to go. And I still remember afterwards several people and I, we were sitting around, were like We're not gonna be able to recover from this.

Yeah, that's, I mean you were so passionate and you did so much. I mean you worked so much and we already had so much stuff done. And the thing that kind of saved us because we were super depressed as Stone keeps shipped — yep, and Chris Taylor, who had already worked with us. He had come unpaid and worked some nights. He was at the meetings, the pizza meetings.

He was released because there was no stone keep. I think they start going to talk about a stone keep too, and it never happened.

Um, so, yeah, we got him and it was like, okay, we can do this. But I just remember and Leonard said years later, when Leonard and I were counting what are all the times we thought we were screwed and we talked about the almost cancellations, that's the first time I told him, yeah, you don't know this. But, uh, I almost quit because I couldn't afford a mortgage. And the mortgage guy was literally laughing at me about what I was paid because. And he was like: look, dude, I've worked with computer programmers at a bunch of different companies.

You were the absolute lowest paid one I've ever seen, by like orders of magnitude. And he was just like: you cannot get a loan, there's no strings I can pull, there's nothing I could lie to any bank at any interest rate. This is not going to happen, and I remember thinking, wait, a minute, I'm getting, I'm getting fruit here. But I mean we were talking about that and that he didn't know about that one. And he said, yeah, but, and with Scott Campbell, because we were like who's gonna think of all the ideas of the who's? Like there were some things about the junk town and the Hub that were just so all Audi, they were like you go to junktown, you're like I get it.

Some people were scared. They were mutant animals eating them. They went into a junkyard and there were stacks of cars and that thing still worked. So they moved some cars and then suddenly things aren't eating them every day, Temple.

But it was such a cool thing. And also I remember London goes: oh, we can make that really fast, because it was, um, back then, the stuff it was hard to do — organic, and it was hard to do, um, anything with fur, that's. For sure, fur dirt. I remember Jason complaining how hard dirt was to do. I'm like, well, you better get used to it. This game's got a lot of dirt. Yeah, the cars weren't that hard. So putting the car models and stacking them up and not having to worry about doing the Interiors, they like that.

So I just remember that was, uh, that was a rough day. Well, I mean, so I have talked to many, many people, uh, since and, uh, you know, they're like, oh, so what'd you do on Fallout? I told him a little bit and they're like, oh, so you know, when it shipped, and I'm like, well, you know I don't have a lot of insight into all the things that went into that because I had left, and they're like, oh, really, and like, yeah, um, honestly, um, looking back, uh, you know. At, uh, at everything I tell people, um, finish what you start right. It's like I think, leaving Fallout — not just one, I did, but you know, just leaving a project in the middle of development, just don't do it right. You know, it's like I've only done it one time in my entire professional career. That was Fallout, and the only project I regret is Fallout, you know, because that was that, out of all the things I've worked on — and you know I've worked on some things I'm really super proud of, but Fallout is the one is like God damn it, I wish I would have seen that all the way through. Here's what I should tell you, because I left Fallout 2.. Um, I always tell people not to regret anything, because I always go like, okay, if I hadn't left Fallout 2, I never would have made.

My own company. I never made Arcanum in some of those other projects. So I don't want to ever say I regret anything. But Fallout is one of two projects I ever walked away from in my career and neither felt good, didn't feel good.

However, in hindsight, it was the right thing to do, no matter how people felt, no matter what people said, and so I always think that, even though I think it would have been awesome — and I hope I haven't stressed that too much — for you to have stayed, I was never really angry. Because I've heard you became a game director and I'm like, well, that's awesome. I mean, that's, how could, how could you ever go? You know, hey, screw You should have stayed and been a designer on this, been the lead designer on it I mean that was a huge step up of what you did. And I'm happy you did it and tons of things worked out. You had a great career and I I wanted to balance that with: we were all sad you left. We really were sad that you weren't there and that's why years later — I mean you left in late 95, so late 97 — we're doing the final parts of the game and the manual has to be done.

And I don't remember — I want to say it was Leonard, but somebody went. Hey, a lot of people worked on this game, but remember the original Genesis of this game. I want those names all on a credit line and I'm really glad your name is everything and I'm really glad we did this because I don't think people know enough about what you did. A lot of fallouty, Fallout bits are only there because of Scott Campbell, uh well, I mean, I, you know, like, so you know what I saw your video on credits and, uh, I think that is so perfectly put.

Right, you know, it's like, even though you might have, um, the Inception of, like an idea or something like that, that kind of means nothing, especially like when you look at like a final product, because it's a collaborative effort. Right, it's like everyone craps it and pushes it and molds it into the final product. Right, I mean, as you said in that video, that, even though it sounds as though you might be speaking very, you know, politically correct, when you're like, well, we did this, you know you, but that's the truth, man, I mean it's like I, I can't take credit for any of this stuff because, you know, especially, Fallout, when you have people that you know in.

Essence are all game players, we're, all you know, have in our minds like what kind of game we want to make. You know, we all understand the principles of design and art and most of us engineering. You know it's like we were all, just like you know we were game developers and you know it's like you know, even though some of us had some cool ideas, everyone ripped off of those ideas and it became something greater than you know it's, Inception. So, you know, I, I usually just say, hey, you know, I, uh I helped out with, like the original story, part of Fallout, right, and uh, that's usually where I keep it. Uh, here's what I like to tell people. There's two periods in a game that require tons of heavy lifting and passion and commitment: the beginning, where there's nothing and everything. you're like what's the story? What's the setting, what's the art style gonna be? We have no tools, we can't make anything, we don't even know the rough outline of what we want to make.

And then the ending, where you actually get this thing across the Finish Line — yeah, Against All Odds and bugs and people yelling at you and marketing, people going: ah, I promised it on the shelves. Well, I, I should have done that, but okay, your problem has now become my problem, um. Those are the two worst parts, and so I felt like I mean, you were there with us at the very beginning and you got us pushed past some of those hard conceptual points, and I just want people, if there's one thing, they walk away from this. Wow, we've been talking for over an hour. If they walk away with one thing, it's: wow, Scott Campbell had a.

Lot to do with Fallout. Oh well, that's what I want them walking away with, because you did a picture of You know I have, I have, honestly, I've worked on a lot of uh of games. Uh, you know, I've, I've, uh, I've touched a great many titles, uh, in the uh, you know, 30 some odd years that I've been around and uh helped, uh, you know, some, you know, from the Inception Point, helped uh some of them, just like, you know, uh, uh, you know, with like some systems and uh others, you know I've, you know, done most of the design, heavy lifting, um, you know, in some big projects, some small projects, you know, lots of console games, uh, yeah, um, I mean, I uh literally regret nothing. Um, you know, I think that the time I spent at uh logicwear uh helped me. Become a much better designer, and all this time, you know, like when, uh, you know, founding, uh, you know, white moon dreams, my God, 16 years ago, that's amazing. I know we're, like I said, we're, still a an independent studio, um, so it's just, you know, we're the ones that own the place and we're still doing good. You know we're, uh, we're helping a lot of other companies out right now. Uh, not just uh uh ship their games, but you know, be, uh, you know AAA titles and uh run at like, you know High frame rate and uh, you know, helping some uh companies out with some design. Uh also helping a couple of skunk work things that I can't really even talk about, um, yeah, yeah, it's just between us, yeah, exactly. Well, let me tell you a uh, ndas or uh are one of those. Strong, binding things that everyone should be afraid of. But, uh, but, yeah, man, uh, it's, uh, it's uh.

Fallout is again one of those things that, like you know, I tell people like um, uh, you know, oh, I worked on this game. I worked on that game. You know it's like uh, um. You know some of the games we worked on at uh, white moon. You know it's like, oh, star Blood arena, and a lot of times it's like what's that?

It's like, well, it was a PlayStation VR launch title and they're like oh, yeah, okay. Or I'm like, oh, yeah, um, you know, uh, War Machine tactics. You know the war machine tabletop game. You know we did that and you know, okay, it was like all right.

Well, how about uh, myth three, the wolf age? You know I, I really did a whole lot of. Work on that and you know they're like, oh, myth, uh, yeah, that was that bungee game. Yeah, well, yeah, okay, I played one and two. You know we're like, uh, you know, oh, yeah, I actually worked a little bit on like God of War, a little bit on like Shadow the Colossus, a little bit, unlike, you know, um, uh, Killzone a little, a little bit on like a whole bunch of other, these tiny games. When I was at Sony, uh, I made this game called uh, God, I hate this name — but uh, Neopets, uh The Darkest Fairy, which was Sony's attempt to make a Legend of Zelda game in the Neopets Universe. I did that entire design, um, and uh, yeah, me and George weissing — oh my God, we spent so much time on that.

Um, and uh, yeah, looking back on like all the little things, Fallout is still. The one that, like I mentioned that and everyone's like you did that and I'm like yeah, and I think we should thank Bethesda resurrecting that license and getting it mainstream. But, yes, I, I know what you mean, because you sometimes want to go. I did other things too, but everyone was like I would tell us Fallout stories. Yep, I just, and so I just want to make sure you understand that like I'm thanking you not for my — just me and from The Fallout team, but for the fans. Thank you very much.

I mean, Fallout was special and I don't mean it's just the attributes. I mean it was a special time, it was a special game and we all know how much we owe you. But now I hope other people know how much they should consider you when they look at Fallout.

Go, I like. This game well, I mean again, totally appreciate all, mean. I mean again, totally appreciate all of the words. But, uh, you know I am. I'm also the guy that came up with the name rad scorpion. Uh, yeah, um, better than the. I was the one who wanted to name the game rad storm out of that because of that dumb movie.

Um, uh, oh God, I forget it because it was the destruction of Jared Sid. It was the worst movie ever, oh, my God. That was uh, uh, oh my God, Maelstrom.

No, no, that'll storm. Oh, destruction of chair 10.. Do you know what's wrong with that? Darren said, is it destroyed?

He escapes at the end and there's no metal storms. It was so good it needed to be a sequel. Let's just agreed that some of our contributions weren't perhaps the highest points of the game, but it wouldn't have been Fallout with all the stuff you did without that. It's just it was. It was a really cool game. I hope people know Campbell contributed to a lot of cool parts of that cool game. Well, it was, uh, it was a lot of fun and uh, yeah, you know, it's like I uh I came to the conclusion, um a while ago.

Um, someone uh asked me, um, you know, uh, what would you do when you retire? And I thought to myself, well, what I would probably do is I'd probably get, um, a whole bunch of like really cool people that are like really passionate about games together and I'd probably make video games with them. And then I stopped and I thought and I looked around at my company and I was like that's exactly what I did 16 years ago. I guess I'm retired now, huh, uh. So I mean, I, I don't ever plan on quitting and honestly, we have, you know, some, you know very large AAA projects that we're trying to get off the ground now. So you know it's the, future is still there. You know it will be another Fallout. Well, I don't know that'll ever be repeated, but you know it's, uh, it's always something to look forward to, right? You know the good times. You know all, the, possibility of making something that you know speaks to people. I agree, I agree, and I wish you the best of luck and I want to thank you for doing this and, uh, this was one of the coolest chats I've done, man, Tim, seriously, it has been way too long. Yeah, we should do this again. Dessertly, definitely, but thank you, yes, well, again, thank everyone out there. Uh, I appreciate it. Um, again, I hope to, well, I guess, talk soon.
