+++
title = "The Origin of Reactivity"
date = "2023-05-24"
id = "u0pJN3jpUjQ"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Player Choice"]
summary = "Hi. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about the origin of reactivity in my computer games."
references = []
+++

Hi. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about the origin of reactivity in my computer games.

I had a lot of fun talking about the origin of dumb characters and the original flawed characters, and all this goes back to early tabletop games that I would play with friends and co-workers. Now I already talked a little bit about reactivity when I talked about how, when I was teaching groups at interplay to people who never played, I made a single dungeon and ran three groups through it and they all — it all — was wildly different and people thought the dungeon was different. Now it was a tiny six room dungeon.

It's just they were playing differently, excuse me. And then turns out, the origin of all this goes way, back to early high school when I first started playing d my main group. I played with literally over a dozen different people, but my main group were three high school friends: Joel, William and Steve. They all played very differently, so I want to talk about each one of them, but there's a common theme here. And then they did things that I never expected them to do and I just had react. I talked about Joel's three dexterity cleric.

A lot of fun with him, you know. When he was surprised he was harder to hit and he — this is the character that had to burn everything coming off of him. So eventually used a green slime pit to get rid of those things.

Well, another aspect of his religion was he had to hide his Temple. So in the course of adventuring they had come across an old Monastery with a couple dungeons below it, his ruins, the monasteries ruins on the surface, and the dungeons were full of monsters. So they cleared it all out.

Joel decided that would be the Great, greatest place for his Temple, but not the first dungeon level. He put his secret temple on the second. They left the ruins on top alone and then the dungeon, the first level dungeon, which was, he considered, the buffer. He made that into his own personal dungeon. He hired a thief and had the magic user in the party dimension door, him in and out of the Temple and the thief put up traps on the first floor. Then, after the dimension dorm out, Joel went through and added extra glyphs of warding, since he was a cleric. So now the whole dungeon level was trapped. Then he started seating it every time they'd go on an adventure and they'd find a cursed item that went in there.

His green slime hit he made. He put green slime in different places in Dungeon — first floor of the dungeon too — as traps. It was such a wild floor that at one point, since he was the only one, who knew it, he ran the other players through it as a dungeon level and they just they hated it. They said it was worse than tomb of wars, which if you've played that's a trappy dungeon, so it's always really like.

He really liked that, but he finally got frustrated with only having a three dexterity. So he went on a quest to try to find gloves of dexterity which, when you put them on Boom, immediate 18 to dexterity. He asked his mentor, a really high level priest in the same religion, if he knew of any and he said: I do, but they're very far away in these mountains which are really treacherous to go through and they're hidden away in a dungeon. That's very treacherous and Joel's like I'm gonna go get him. So he convinced the rest of the party to go. They went on this.

Dangerous Adventure. It was really. They almost got killed multiple times but he got the gloves of dexterity and he put him on in 18 dexterity.

Super happy. They head home and they're not cautious at all. They just basically leave the dungeon and walk down the mountain.

They get attacked by three Cloud Giants. One Cloud giant is hard enough three. They do manage to defeat them, but a few people in the party die, including Joel's cleric.

Now, remember this is far away. They rushed to get him back to his mentor who could raise him, but they missed the deadline. Remember Ray's dead only works for so many days. They missed the deadline by two days. So this high priest tells them I can do a resurrection, but it's very expensive and I have to plead with the god to give me the spell and I'll do it if you give me the.

Gloves from the dead, Clerk. I mean, Joel was upset, but what was the option. So, yeah, he got the gloves, he got to wear them for about an hour, then he died and then he got resurrected. And the price of the Resurrection with the gloves. What's interesting, that entire Quest was generated by me on his desire for gloves, never did find any clues on where to find any more. He ended up retiring that character and he made a new character that was a magic user named Scaramouche and he made scary much, completely unconscious. Scaramouche would open doors, open chests, dive down Wells and die, and they'd get him raised and he'd die again.

His character sheet was a tombstone with multiple dates on it. He finally died so many times he couldn't be raised anymore because there's a limit — one per point of Constitution. But a passing druid very. High level, agreed to reincarnate him and he came back as a troll and he's like: great, now I regenerate everything. A few encounters later, evil match user: Fireballs the troll, he doesn't regenerate fire.

Scaramouche. Um, the other two players, equally reactive stuff. Uh, William played a druid and we got high enough. He made himself a treehouse not too close to the monastery that Joel had. At some point. They encountered a sphere of annihilation and an amulet attuned to it that lets you move it around. He decided — wouldn't decided — that his Druid was so eco-friendly that they dug a pit next to the tree, put the sphere of annihilation in it and then covered that with an outhouse. As if that wasn't enough, there was a pipe coming down — wooden - I'm sorry, wooden — used metal wooden shaft that he threw trash in from different floors of the tree.

House. That would also go down into the sphere and of course, the sphere was always available because William wore the amulet to launch at enemies. It would just burst out of the ground and absorb enemies — all clean and ecologically friendly.

Then there was Steve played an Illusionist. Now he was. He was a long-running character, so he eventually got up to level 14 where he could alter reality, which is kind of like a wish. But every time he did that he aged a few years, so he never did that. He was so cautious, he was so careful how he played his character. That group and I let each of them, by that point, have two characters because that way they'd have six in the party instead of three. They encountered fire Giants — tough, you'd think they'd learned the lesson from the cloud Giants.

No, they did not. They're fighting them several people. In the party die. In fact I think four of the six died and all that was left was Williams druid and Steve's Illusionist. So the fight's over. Four dead people, two living ones. Steve looks at the back of his character sheet and goes: huh, I had a potion of fire giant control.

William's face just goes flat. He looks at me, goes: I kill Steve. I think I talked him off the ledge, but I don't think Steve realized how close he was to joining his four other uh party members in death.

Now, these are all things that just happen, um, but it wasn't unique again to that group. Years later I was in grad school, so in my early 20s, and I convinced uh some neighbors and some friends of mine to play D D with me. It was an interesting group. It was four women and two.

Men and they played D in a way I'd never seen before. I can only call it like super, ultra cooperative. They shared everything.

Items went to the person who could use it the best, not necessarily the person who was next in line to get it. They would use um, if a cursed item dropped they'd figure out: well, maybe someone can use it and the curse won't be that bad for them. They found an item that lets you cast Fire, cast Firebolts, and be immune to Natural heat and cold and resistant to magical heat and cold. But the curse on it meant you couldn't touch anything metal or plant related. It would eventually rust or just dissolve off.

You had a monk in the party. The monk took it. He wore leather pants and I think that's all he wore. He fought unarmed and he changing to shoot fire bolts.

Now a magical bow stick at one point dropped — and how rare is that — and he couldn't use it because it was made of wood, um, he ate mostly meat. I rolled that. He could eat vegetable material, but he went through a lot of utensils. But the group adapted in a way I've never seen if after a battle they'd all applaud each other. When somebody did something great in battle, they'd tell them how great they were. They would parlay with monsters and try to get them to join their group. And one time at work they ended up with a pixie in their group, very capricious little pixie that often got them into trouble, but they ended up loving it was like the, um group mascot. Now, what was interesting is I often wondered why this particular group was like that. Maybe it was because it was.

Mostly women, maybe it was because we were in our 20s — I wasn't playing with children anymore — but one of the things I thought was: we're all in grad school, so we all spent all day either getting yelled at undergraduates in classes where we were teaching assistants, or getting yelled at by professors in meetings where we were research assistants. So when we came to DND that evening, we were done being yelled at by each other or anyone else and it just became this: nice, let's have fun, and I think everybody bought into that. That and I loved that those d sessions had a totally different timber in tone, but they did, like every group I ever played with, do things that I literally could not imagine.

Catherine rolled a druid. She wrote a natural 18, but instead of putting in wisdom, she put it in charisma because she's like I'm going to be the most beautiful Druid anywhere.

So the six of them are adventuring. They encounter an anti-palladin, Dirk, Dirk the merciless. He captured them and he captured everybody, took all their stuff, threw them in the dungeon. But he said: I will let your friends go. He said to Catherine's Druid: I will let your friends go if you agree to marry me, Stay With Me.

She was like: uh, now Dirk did have an 18 Charisma as well, but he was Pure Evil. But Catherine decided to do it. She said: I'll do it, let my friends go, I'll stay with you, he goes, okay, I will. And they went off. He didn't let them go. They were still down in the dungeon, rotting.

She eventually found this out, but she didn't know what she could do. She had none of her items. She was kept in.

Dirk's Castle. She knew that his Patron was a demon and she found out how he talked to the demon. So she knew there was a bowl and somehow it summoned the demon. She used it and the demon knew who she was and what was going on and pretended he appeared. But he said: you have summoned this bowl doesn't summon a demon, it summons your Patron spirit and I'm the spirit of the forest and I will free your friends for you if you agree to give me your soul when you pass.

She's like what? And he's like: we'll use it for the good of the forest. Here's a contract to sign and that's what it said. It said: the next time you die you won't be able to be raised and your soul goes to this poor spirit.

Catherine signed it, of course. As soon as she signed it, the demon revealed. Himself, said: I'm not a force Spirit, I'm Dirk's Patron demon and I own your soul. And she was like, hmm, but you're, do the other parts, he goes. Hey, yeah, you signed it, and he snapped his fingers and the party was removed from the dungeon.

Catherine's Druid was with them. They had all their items back and everything was good until Catherine's character discovered that she was pregnant with Dirk's child and her first reaction was: hey, my magical leather says that it adjusts to people's size, so will it adjust and be maternity leather? That was her concern. That started a whole series of side quests where occasionally Dirk would show up and he's like: I will have you back. And there was fights and the demon would occasionally show up and go.

Don't forget me. It was a very strange campaign and unlike any I've ever run, but it was fun. And later on I remember making video games and thinking I've got a lot of lessons to learn here.

One players never do what you think. Two.

Dialogue can be super fun and lead to some situations it's just fighting cannot lead to. That is a good thing to do and three players all have different ways of playing. They have different way things that they think are fun.

Um, one of my groups loved building strongholds. One group loved being cooperative. One group was very competitive with each other. They all liked it. None of those were wrong ways to play.

I just had I had to react to them. I didn't force them into a mode. It also meant I had to keep a ton of side quests around because I never knew what they were gonna do. I had listened lists of side quests whenever I designed an area. I would often put other things in the area and see that well, there's a dragon up here, there's a cave of mystery over here, there's an evil Necromancer layer down here, because I did not know if they were going to go to the dungeon. This really informed things like Fallout and Arcanum, which had world maps you could go across, and I had to make sure that those world maps are seated with a lot of other things that had nothing to do with the main story arc. I also wanted to move away from the Ultima.

You're here to do good. You're here and you have a goal. Get it, however you want, the game will react, and if you act badly, it will react badly. But I didn't like this idea of: well, you're going to be a good character, you're here to be a hero.

No, you're here to find a water chip. Anyway, you can, if it means killing everyone in Acropolis to get their water chip, great.

So these things informed all my later tabletop campaigns, all my later uh, video games. So I think it's very important that people, if you want to be a game developer, that you keep yourself open, that you're going to learn a lot of things from the different stuff you do, and also player characters will. Players will be players and you can't control that. So instead of trying to do that in an RPG, computer RPG, just let them do what they want. Ah, that was fun, bye-bye.
