+++
title = "Making Good Factions"
date = "2024-02-06"
id = "u7Q2m-82r4c"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Worldbuilding", "RPG Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today, I want to talk about making good factions for your games."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today, I want to talk about making good factions for your games.

This is something that every time I go into making a setting and remember — I think setting is the first step of what you need to do to make a game — I always try to think of what kind of factions are going to be there. And just to be clear what I'm going to talk about, I'm talking about designing the factions, not writing dialogues for particular characters. I'm not good at that — but I am talking about making factions that you've designed so that they seem like they belong in your world and have their own goals and are just fun to interact with. I'm going to talk about how I think you should go about doing that.

I'm going to use examples from Fallout, because that is the oldest game where I did this and at this point, I don't believe there can possibly be any spoilers for that game, although when I talked about China nuking first, apparently that was a big spoiler for people. Anyway, we're going to talk about Fallout, so let's dive into it first of all. When you're designing a faction, you really want to make sure that it's not a simple monolithic entity. So the factions I'm thinking of in Fallout — things like the mutants, the brother of Steel, junk toown, The Hub — these were not simplistic, monolithic, where everybody in those factions all felt the same thing, acted the same way, treated the player the same way. What I liked about him was there were all sorts of characters that could be written to be part of those factions. I give you an example: in the mutant faction — the master, the lieutenant, those — those were very different characters than your standard dumb mutant that you'd encounter in combat. In the Brotherhood of Steel you had free the scientist or rhombus or cabit at the front door. These were very different characters from each other and from a typical Brotherhood of Steel Grunt in power armor.

Now let me digress a little bit into writing, even though I won't be telling you how to write, because that would be a whole another video done by a Hally different person. But when you have to write, you have to make sure that you write different kinds of characters. I think I've even said multiple times I'm so tired of narrative designers who think that sarcasm is the first and best and most Touchstone e way to make a character. I've seen so many sarcastic characters that if I didn't, if I played a game that didn't have any sarcastic character, I'd be happy.

It's it. To me it's the. It's too much of the go-to, it's too easy, it's too obvious. So if you're thinking of a character and his, the main point of, this character is he's really sarcastic, think again. Um, I punted several of those characters for my games on.

The only com uh feedback was: this character is sarcastic. We have enough of those. Figure something else out.

There's a whole bunch of ways you can make characters. That characters you can make characters that are really smart. Really, I mean the character themselves are intelligent. They are thinking of everything like a scientist. They want data, they want information, they're trying to be logical in whatever they're doing.

You can have dumb characters, you know, that are just as dumb as the player character when he gets dumb dialogue. Those are fun, you know you're trying to outsmart them, or at least in one case in Fallout, out dumb them so you can get past them, and that's fun to do. You can make characters that are violent. That their first Touchstone, their first you.

Know course of action is just violence. Just you say anything wrong, they're gonna kill you or they're gonna. You know they don't want you part of their group or whatever. They're very insular.

That's pretty fun. You can make characters that are passive, that are very easy to for the player to convince of things. Just go along with what the player is thinking: um, those are fun characters to have when you write dialogue for player. Characters that are, um, skill-based — we have dialogue skills. Those are fun characters, and so to make a fun faction, you've got to have room in it to have all kinds of characters.

If it's monolithic, if everybody who's part of that faction acts the exact same way, that's bad. Now that isn't to say that the faction doesn't have a goal that most of the people in the faction would support, but they'd support it in their own way, for example, and usually you want that faction to have really realistic goals so that it makes sense when the player learns about them. For example, the mutants seem to just be attacking people, but once you learn more, you find out they're raing, they're raing towns and they're rating vaults. And as you get far enough along in the story, you find out that they're looking for humans to dip in the Vats, and theyve recently figured out that humans that have less radiation turn into better mutants when they get dipped in bats of f. So their raids are concentrating on finding what they call Prime humans, that didn't receive a lot of radiation or haven't gone out much.

That's why places like, you know, towns are better, because there might be some people never leave the town or rarely leave the town, and maybe they have less exposure to. Radiation, when the master heard about vaults, he really started sending out his mutant squats to try to uncover locations of vaults. Because vaults are full of prime humans, especially the ones that never opened.

So once you learn that, you're like, oh, that makes sense to me, I see what's going on here, and also because there's a bunch of dumb mutants among the rating parties, and then there's people like the lieutenant. You're like, oh, I get it I get why there are different kinds of mutants and why the smarter ones are rarer. It just starts to make sense, and that's what I love about those factions. They support the storyline. Uh, the Brotherhood of Steel in Fallout was another good faction — because you discover that their goal is to find and preserve technology.

But you're like: wait a minute, we've have cases of them attacking and destroying stuff. Yes, they destroy. Anything they leave behind to make sure it doesn't fall into the wrong hands. From the brotherhood's point of view, this entire post-apocalypse was caused by technology in the wrong hands and from their you know point of view, the only right hands are their hands. They are very insular, however. They don't like people to know where their base is. They let very few people into it. They are not a police force. They don't go out and police human settlements. The only time they leave their — uh, their own vault is to look for Tech, to get Tech, blueprints of tech, examples of working Tech, and to destroy all the rest of the tech. That's their goal, that's their raison.

Detra, now you may go. Why do I need to make these factions like this and why do I have to come up with these goals and these variety of people? Well, first of all, it's realistic for those of you who think that's good. Personally, I don't care about this, but I threw it in my list because people — well, it's realistic to be the way, sure it is, I don't really care about that. The thing I care about is factions like the ones that described, that are non-monolithic and have goals and a variety of characters in them, can be used to support the story. If you're making stories that take place in the Wasteland, you're going to need a lot of NPCs that either help or oppose the player for different reasons. By making factions that have goals and lots of different characters in them. No matter what the charact, the player character, is trying to do, every faction probably has someone within it that would help or oppose them and therefore get involved in that part of the story. Similarly, having factions with lots of different characters in them supports a lot of the different player character builds. If you're making a very combat oriented character, then it's good that there are some uh NPCs in each of these factions that fight, because that's what you do and it's not fun just mowing everyone down. It's kind of fun, but you want some kind of challenge in each one of these factions so they're like really powerful guards in the hub. They're the mutants are all pretty powerful, especially the ones that wearing armor and use miniguns, the Brotherhood of Steel. They're rough, a tough faction to take on — combat oriented. But if you make a talking character, you still want NPCs and all those factions you can interact with. There are tons of people to talk to in the hub. There are some smart mutants like the lieutenant and stuff that you can have interactions with and when you discover.

The um Cathedral and all the followers that are there, they can be talked with too. So it's fun that it supports that kind of character. And if you make a sneak character and Fallout, all of those factions have big maps that you can sneak around. You can steal stuff, you can pickpocket people. There's a lot of fun things to do and good items to find because those factions are big and rich and we deliberately put in stuff to support those kinds of characters. But I think the single, probably most important thing of having big Rich factions is it supports lots of players — not player characters, but players.

There are some players that love humor. They love talking to funny NPCs, there are a few players who love sarcastic NPCs. You can have them.

I'm just like I think they've been overused, um, and they're also. That's just a form of humor. Too, there are some players that like mean NPCs. They like them because either they themselves are mean and like: oh, there's a fellow mean NPC.

I'm glad I'm supported when I'm wiping out all these people. But they also like me and NPCs because it gives them a reason to take them out or screw them over, whether it's attacking them or stealing all their stuff they justify by going: well, they're mean so by having these Big, Rich factions that have lots of different characters in them. No matter what kind of player character the player makes, the player still is going to have a preference for what kind of NPCs they like to interact with. So having lots of NPCs ensures that there's no one faction that the player feels, oh, this is the only faction I can support. In fact, one of the things I loved the most about Fallout New Vegas.

Was, at some point I could not figure out what faction to support, so I ended up saving the game and I've replayed it: supporting house, supporting Yes Man, supporting Caesar's Legion. I just I supporting um NCR. I just wanted to see what would happen and I liked people in all of those, so I liked joining them and I liked opposing them. I played once where I blew up the Brotherhood of Steal. I felt bad about it but I wanted to see what would happen and there were some characters down there I didn't like. So what's the tldw? I know it's too late, but here it is.

If you're making a game, definitely have multiple factions, but within those multiple factions definitely put lots of different kinds of characters. The faction can have a goal and it should be a realistic goal that all of the different characters in the faction support. In their own way, but because you have lots of different characters in that faction, there's a lot of different ways that different player characters can interact with them and there's lots of things that will track that faction to different kinds of players — players. So try to make as many different factions as you can with very different faction members, and that's pretty much it takes.
