+++
title = "No Simple Answers"
date = "2023-08-08"
id = "UQwIUbUZ3Ak"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Q&A"]
summary = "Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about a variety of topics that have been questions that people have submitted that"
references = []
+++

Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about a variety of topics that have been questions that people have submitted that

I've put on a list that I called no simple answers. These were questions that were frequently: hey, do you prefer this or this, or could you tell me the pros and cons of this and this? Or why did you used to do this? And then you did this later in other games, and it basically boils down to: there's a lot of different ways of putting in features and working in groups and making games and some of them don't have simple answers.

There is no clear best. There's no best practice. There's no best genre. There's no best way of doing a genre.

So I'm going to run through a bunch of these questions that got asked and I'll try to tell you what the pros and cons are and that way, if you're making a game yourself, you can decide. Oh and, by the way, I found a shirt I didn't wear. I forgot.

I got a bunch of dress shirts. I'm not gonna wear dress shirts every day, but hey, new shirt anyway, let's look at the first one. This — sorry, someone asked this a long time ago. It took me a long time to get to it.

Somebody asked what I felt about isometric versus first person in RPGs, and there is no. This is a perfect example of there is no answer of the best RPG is boom isometric or the best RPG is first person. What I like, I? Well, first of all, we didn't used to have an option. Fallout was isometric, not because we decided it's the best to be isometric. We may Fallout isometric because we tried making different engines, or I did, and the isometric one looked the best and was kind of the best for what game we were trying to. Make, but we didn't have a big option there.

The first person games were low poly load, uh resolution on the texture. I just thought they were kind of looking so we went with isometric. Isometric is great for tactical fighting, anything that you need to kind of know the lay of the land, you want to know where cover is, you want to know where the other enemies are, you want to know line of sight — that isometric games are great for that.

It's also great if you're controlling a party, because you can see your party all at once. You can zoom out and click on them and it's just a much better way of controlling the group first person. On the other hand, if you're a single player character, first person is great, especially for immersion. You mean, you're right there, you're seeing things, you can walk around and look behind things. You can go into buildings without roofs without having to wear roofs and walls getting in the way.

So I like, I like both. It really depends on what kind of game you want to make. Now, the way engines work, it's really your choice. Decide what game you want to make and then decide whether or not it would be better as isometric or first person.

Um. I don't know if you can hear it. I've got a dog snoring at my feet so I apologize if it's coming up on this. The next one is a number of people ask me about complex versus simple game mechanics, because that's something I left out of my development preferences because I've done it both ways. I will admit a: simple mechanics bring in more audience. If you want more people playing your game, the less complex your game is, it seems. You seem to.

Get more people to a point, if people think you're pandering to them or the people wanting complex mechanics and get very vocal. Um, that can be negative as well, but the thing I like is complexity can be added later. You can start with simple mechanics and then make them more complex as the player digs into them. It's very similar, to, um, what I used to think about lore dumps in games. A lot of games used to be like: you know, you talk to someone and then they get into this big description of what's going on and you're like, how do I end this dialogue now?

Often we say like, oh, I found this book. Or if you want to know more, you should talk to this person. Basically, let the player know: here's what you need to know and if you want to know more, here's what you can. Do to get It's instead of saying: here's a bunch of lore for you to Wade through, there's a bunch of lore over there for you to find. And I feel the same way with mechanics. If, your character creator throws a wall of information and data at the player right when they start up and it's just an awful lot to take in and they're not sure what's good, they're not sure what, matters in the game, they haven't played the game yet. Maybe you should consider.

Some games make you do character creation after you play a level. Some make you pick very simple things about your character, like this is what I look like and this is my gender and this is my name. And then they start buying things later in The Outer Worlds. We just made it so that you really only had to pick, like here's.

A category of skills I'm interested in having. Uh, I'll worry about those skills later. So I like both. I think you can have both in the same game — game But it really is again up to the game you want to make. Uh, someone asked me if I had a preference for deterministic or dice rolls for skill checks, and I assume they men in dialogue. But it could, you know, easily be outside of dog.

Obviously I use dice rolls for combat, but the reason I, I personally prefer rolling. I love that element of Randomness. I love, like, did you happen to disable that trap or did you trigger it? Did you happen to get that lock picked? Or did your lock pick, break off and jam the lock? You know, did You're talking to someone. Did you manage to persuade them? Did you manage to intimidate? Them? Did you manage to get them to believe your lie?

I like that, but I also understand that in this Modern Age, where people prefer saves on demand rather than save points, people will just save scum, everything. So it kind of reminds me of modern air travel. People hate it what it's like, but we've created it, We basically decided: I'm gonna pick the cheaper Airline whenever I want to fly, so Airlines all there was a rush to become the cheapest and then add fees in for everything else because everybody saves gum. We kind of went to just doing deterministic. You're like: oh, your skills, 50, he's persuaded.

Oh, you have a lock, pick of 40, you're allowed to play the mini game on this lock, otherwise you cannot. You can never pick this lock, and we did that just because everybody was saves coming.

Um. I don't want to go back to not giving the player the agency to do their skill rolls so or their save games. So I probably won't go back to skill rolls, at least not skill rollers outside of combat, and that's probably why, uh, one person asked what I liked better.

Uh, working at small game development Studios or big ones. This is very much a pro and con I mean I've worked at. Probably the smallest Studio I worked at was the first one, which was Pegasus, later cyberon, that never had more than eight people at it the whole time. And then the largest one I worked at was, of course, well, interplay got to be about 600 people, but team wise, WildStar, which is already in the 150s or whatever, and I think win over 200, was the biggest team I worked on.

Let me just say here are the pros. And cons in my brain on a small team: you know everyone, you know what everyone's doing, you know what they're working on. You know what people are good at, what they're bad at. You can assign out work. Based on that, development tends to go faster. There's more feedback. That happens because there's less overhead, so you're more Nimble. If you try something and it doesn't work, you usually know soon. You can try something else, before weeks or months have gone by and you're like: oh no, we've got to commit to this thing.

However, small teams require a great deal of trust. It is very easy because people get responsible for things. They're the ones doing this. It's very easy for them to go yeah, yeah, everything's fine and kind of sweep things out of the rug and you don't find out about it for a long time.

Big teams: are really needed for certain kind of games. It takes a lot more time to make a large, open world, first person, high resolution, modern game. Then it took us to make isometric games in the past. You know what?

What we could have done with 20 or 30 people in the past. Now take 80 or 90, so you'd you obviously need bigger teams to make certain games that you want to realize, given that that means there's a lot more overhead. This is why production people are more and more necessary on these bigger games. You need people to coordinate art and code and design and to make sure that when bottlenecks happen, those get flushed out as quickly as possible. This also creates a lot more what I call politics: um. In the middle of office you have people trying to think about where their career is. Going and how they can go up the chain, and sometimes work gets coordinated because of politics and not because of feature set or schedule.

I've never been good at this. I've never been good at detecting this. I've never been good at playing that game. That's the game. I'm not good at the politics game. So in general I'm a little leery when game team, when team sizes go over a certain size, and because of that I never really. WildStar was the first game that was I was ever going to make with a really huge team and I didn't finish it.

So in general I skew smaller than bigger. Uh, the last question wasn't really um features. It was about how to balance generalist and specialist player characters. But I'm gonna put that in as, hey, there's ways of doing both in a game. I like having both my early games. Skewed more specialist and then later on I began to go: oh it's kind of important, I really want generalists in here, and you can see this. I started doing this as early as Arcanum because you know, we had the magic Tech and there was a way to balancing it out.

Generalist characters are great for people who want to spread their points out, who want to be jack of all trades. It gives the player more options and I think where that helps is on main story quests. If you remember when I talked about main story quests or things you are required to do to finish the game, and because of that we had to make sure that any possible player character build could finish it, that meant the checks tended to be lower on if the remarkable ways of doing it. One of them had a pretty low check, just in case. Someone had spread their points out like a generalist. That also means, though, that generalists have a lot more options when they do those main quests, because if they can get their skills higher, either because they've been roughly General, but there's a few — they put more points in. Maybe they can do one of the other methods. So they're not always doing it um.

A certain the — whatever the low one is — that was picked for that Quest, but we always tried to make the low skill point one different, in different areas. Sometimes the combat was easier, sometimes talking was easier, sometimes stealth was easier. So the generalists going through the main story Quest find that he has many different ways, he's doing different things to get through those story quests. This the specialist, on the other hand, has honed a particular skill and set of perks to their highest end. Yes, this gives them all kinds of bonuses, but it makes some main story quests harder because they can only really do it one way and that way might not be the easiest way for that main story Quest. Conversely, there are side quests that can be much, easier for them because, since we don't support every way of going through it, and we don't have require there to be a minimum check if they get into a side quest, that's up their alley and it tends to be very easy for them because they've really maxed out their skills in that area for The Outer Worlds. I'll tell you: what I tried to do is, when we put in the skill unlocks for different skills, I try to make sure that the first and last unlocks were really cool. For this reason, generalists tend to buy. A lot of skills, so they got a lot of first unlocks. I wanted to encourage that because those first unlocks were really cool.

However, Specialists tend to take a few of those skills up to maximum and it takes a lot of points to do that. I tried to make the last one really cool, so it was aspirational to get to the end of that skill and go: wow, now I can do this really cool thing that a generalist will never be able to do. So I tried to hedge my bets on that one.

Um. I don't think I have a preference. In the future, if I were to make a game, I'd make sure that generous generalists and specialist characters were well represented. But I don't think there is a clear pro and con to these characters. I like playing both, in other words. So this video may make a good um companion video to my design preferences, because this is less of my design preferences in this and more of a. Here are a bunch of features that I and situations, game development scenarios that I can, you know, take or leave. I can work in either group and I don't really have a clear preference. So I think I hope that helps you realize that when you're facing some things in game development, there may not be a clear answer to what you're trying to do and you really have to look at what's important to you and decide what to do based on that. So I hope that helped.
