+++
title = "Brainstorming Example"
date = "2025-12-12"
id = "uVaM2B4Qr-M"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Development"]
summary = "A while back I made a video on brainstorming. Let's do an example here."
references = ["9lYuzefVvMA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to do a brainstorming example.

And by that I mean two years ago I did a video on how I like to brainstorm. I used to run brainstorming meetings at almost every company I worked at, where I'd gather people together, cross-disciplinary people who wanted to, and it was all volunteer. If you didn't want to go to the brainstorming session, you certainly didn't have to, and we were going to talk about either an idea I was going to present or I was there to collect ideas. You know, pay people, give me examples of what kind of games you want to make. I mean, that's how Fallout got started.

So what I did was I went through my idea book — one of many idea books I have — and I picked one and I want to talk about it. And then I want to walk through the design elements, how we'd go through all the different design elements and talk about what would work, what we need to dive down deeper. In And then, after we're done, some concerns I have about the idea itself, to give you an idea of what brainstorming looks like, kind of at this level in development. So here's the example And, by the way, it's short, it's sweet, it's to the point. That's an example of what we want from brainstorming. If your brainstorm idea takes five minutes for you even to talk about the basics, it's too complicated. So here's my brainstorm example: You wake up, someone's looking down at you who looks just like you and tells you someone's hunting them and therefore they're now hunting you because you're their clone. Then they leave Door unlocks But, um, that's it.

That's the whole idea, so let's dive into the design elements that I think need to be discussed and extended And let's go in the order I think they should go, which is setting, story and then mechanics. So the setting. The first thing we should be talking about is: what is this world going to be like? That's beyond the door, You might originally assume.

Well, it's high-tech, because he told you, or she told you, because it's an exact copy of you, that you're a clone. But does that have to be the case? I mean, it could be a magic world, because there was a clone spell in Dn D and there's a clone cloning like magic in a lot of video games. Uh, that are fantasy, maybe he was a shape shifter, maybe there is a spell you can cast and create a duplicate of yourself, and he just used the word clone. There's a lot of ways you could do this. It also might be a mix, maybe this is Arcanum 2.. Maybe this is how Arcanum 2 is starting, and the world out that door is a mix of magic and tech.

Who knows? It could be aliens. That could have been an alien tricking you. It could be a superhero and his ability is to make a copy of himself, and now that some super villain is hunting them, they made a copy, and that's You good luck, bait.

What is happening here? It is wide open. Do not make any assumptions, because the word clone was used in the initial brainstorm sentence. Now let's talk about the story. Story comes right after, talking about the setting. So what is the story here We should talk about?

Well, who's hunting you and why are they hunting you and, for that matter, who are you? These are things that we, as the designers, should know, even if we don't exposit it all in the first two minutes of gameplay. This could be something that the whole game builds towards that, when you finally confront this villain at the end — who's hunting you — you find out why. And it has something to do with you. And maybe you're not a good person, or I should say, you're not the clone of a good person. So there could be a whole bunch of reasons why this person is hunting you and wants to kill you. That may not make them the bad person. So that's the kind of thing that I think would be really fun to explore in the story. And that's this is why, when you do brainstorming, you throw out those breadcrumbs: Hey, what do you want to do?

What do you think would be cool? And then this leads us into mechanics. So if we made it a lot a headway on what the setting's like outside that door and what kind of story we're going to tell in that setting, well, what kind of mechanics do? We want? And at that point we should probably step back and go: what kind of game is this? We just assumed RPG, because we make RPGs. But maybe it would be better as an action game. Maybe it should just be a story, a narrative game, maybe it should be an MSIM. Let's discuss that before we double down on RPG mechanics and then later decide: oh, this would make a better msim. So maybe all that RPG mechanic discussion wasn't a good idea. Now, brainstorming is cross-disciplinary, so there's a whole bunch of things you may be talking about in a brainstorming session that h that that isn't design, whether it's narrative design or system design. You might have artists there and you want to talk art style. What would be a really good art style for this that might be reflective of the setting or the story?

What would be good music for? This? Because this sounds like a mystery, so what kind of music would be appropriate for this? But if there's a lot of combat, we're going to need that kind of music. This is the kind of things you should talk about when you're discussing what kind of setting and story and mechanics you have. That will kind of inform your art style and inform your music composition style. And then, after you talked about that, I mean you could be talking about that for probably an hour. I would leave people with my concerns about this. If you don't have concerns about your own idea, you're not thinking about it deeply enough. Because I have several concerns about this idea.

The first one is: this replayable? If this is the kind of game where the big reveal at the end is: oh you know, you're not a clone, You're the original, The other person. Who came in was the clone, or you killed someone and that's why you're being chased, because you're a Mur diddly Erdler. Is this going to make the game replayable? If the story is so based on mystery reveals, is it going to make any sense to ever replay this game.

And is that important to us? Are we okay making a oneanddone game Part of what? When I was thinking about this, I was wondering if it was too close to the original game Torment, where you wake up and you have no idea who you are and you're going around the world trying to find out who you are. And if also, what you've done in the past, Does that define who you are today? All that kind of stuff, Which is leads to me to the bigger question is: has this been done before?

Is there already a game out there that's so? Similar to this that maybe we should just not pursue this past the brainstorming phase? This isn't something you necessarily need to talk about right away in brainstorming. But if you do decide after a brainstorming session that everybody's really interested in this and you have a really good idea for a setting and a story and mechanics and art style and music style, maybe you need to double check that this hasn't been done before. And the other thing that concerns me personally: I'm on record as saying I don't like using amnesia, especially explosive amnesia.

Is this game too close to that? Is making you a clone of someone and therefore that person physically, but not mentally. Is that too close to just saying "Oh, this is just amnesia with a new hat on"? That's something we probably want to discuss.

It's certainly a concern, if I don't like games based on Amnesia. Why? Am I making this game? Is this different? Is this different enough? Can we justify this?

These are things you should talk about at a brainstorming session. The reason I wanted to talk about this is I see people — you know I poo pooed ideas before and said: you know, ideas are nothing without implementation. But brainstorming sessions are really important. It's a form of team bonding, but it's also. You may have someone on your team who has a brilliant idea of how to do something — whether it's a mechanic or a setting or something — and they just don't know how to implement it because they haven't thought of a good story for it or they haven't thought of some way of bringing it to fruition. And that might come out in a brainstorming session and you might go: "This is brilliant, We're going to do this, We're going to make your game". I've done a lot of brainstorming sessions. Not everybody is temperamentally suited to do brainstorming sessions, but I think running them the way I just described and that example I gave as how you would take a one-s sentence example of a game and tease it apart and all the different questions you should ask about it and how it should proceed and why you should have a bunch of different people at the brainstorming session, I think that's a good example of, in general, how a brainstorming meeting should go. So hope you like that.
