+++
title = "Respec"
date = "2025-08-18"
id = "V1k4tpDQWDI"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems", "RPG Design"]
summary = "I talk about the respec feature, when a game refunds and lets you respend the points you gained from leveling."
references = ["lY1jhsgHE70", "mbMAufVe_ds", "JczYH1MhrfM"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Funky Town, directions 2 and subloations within.

But oh no, today I'm talking about respec because I'm answering a question from protect one cloud, who asked: "Do you have a video on player respec, resetting talents, stats, character, investments? If not, might make a good video to go over". Protect one cloud, You're right, I haven't made a video on this. I've mentioned it here and there in different videos, usually as an example of a feature that some people love, some people hate, or is there for balance reasons or meeting a design goal or whatever. But let me let's talk about respec specifically and that way I can talk about all that in one spot and then point people to the one video. I think before I start, I should probably define respspec, because it means slightly different things to a lot of people. I'm talking about respec. My definition for respec is when a game lets you get back all of your skill perk attribute spell. Points, any combination of those, to respend them. Uh, some games let you change class too. I think that is a little rare and a little more extreme For purposes of this video. Think of respec as you're allowed to rele the character that you've made, as if they were gaining all those levels again for the first time. Now, historically, respect didn't used to exist.

RPGs used to draw heavily from the tabletop world, and I don't think I ever saw a tabletop RPG that had respspec. And I don't remember them in any of the early computer RPGs I played from the 80s. I'm trying to think if I even saw it in the 90s. The first time I personally saw Respec was in MMO RPGs. I don't know whether it was WoW or City of Heroes, but one of those was the first time I saw a way of getting back. Earlier spent points and respending them again.

Now it's in a ton of games, Um, even single player RPGs, which I'm going to talk about as possibly not needing them. But we'll get to that. Respec exists in a whole bunch of different implementations. Often it's just free. You can just respspec Um It's just something your character can do. You press a button and you respend everything.

More often there's something that restricts the respect in some way. Sometimes it's money. You have to spend money to respect your character and that cost goes up every time you respect. It's a it's a way of saying: "Hey, you can dip your tool, your toe, your toe to tool, you can dip your toe in the respect pool, but if you keep doing it's going to really get expensive. Other games require a token to respect.

Maybe it's expensive, so it's like: the money one, but you can buy it when you have the money and then you can decide when you want to respect. Maybe it's a rare drop, maybe there's a boss somewhere, or maybe there's somebody somewhere that occasionally, on death, drops a respe token which lets you remake your character. Maybe it's just something that's really hard to find. There are some games that do it in a restricted location as well, like you have to go to this particular trainer in town, or you have to go back to your own base and then you can respspec there, and it might include any of the other restrictions as well. So there's a whole bunch of different ways respspec is has been implemented, and again you'll have to decide which one is right for you, and we'll talk about that.

Let's talk about why. Let's talk about some of the pros and cons of respec. And I'm going to. I'm going to describe the pros, as this is why it tends to get used. This is like when games use it. Players who like respec like it because it lets them try a whole bunch of different build configurations without having to go back and make a new character and then replay the game for hours. It also is a way around — um, what games kind of let you do? Because some games you could actually lose an experience level or multiple experience levels and then you'd have to replay the game to regain them. But a side effect of that is you could re-choose different things.

I've talked about EverQuest a lot. I played that game a lot, there were times where my character died and lost so much XP they got dropped down a level And when I releveled I chose something different. I was torn. Between two things. I had already seen how the other thing played. So when I releveled back up I chose a different. Uh, I think it was a different spell. This isn't really respe. This is games that you know can are, tough and take away your experience points. But it acted sort of like a very rough protospec.

On the flip side, there are a lot of designers who like respec because certain designs they want to do are either more viable or maybe they're just plain easier to make. That way, assuming respspec exists — For example, if you put in a lot of highle perks in your game that require a certain attribute or skill minimum, that's more playable because the players can always respspec their, character. When they see that that highle perk is available and they can, they can get it. This is especially true in games that don't normally let you go back and pick your attributes. But if you respect, you can, similarly, if there's an item out there that requires a, skill or an attribute minimum or even a particular perk to use, the player can just respspec. So if you, if you're using a really good weapon with the set of perks you have and then you find a new weapon, that would be way better, but only if your character had been built differently. Respspec allows you to do that, so for some players and designers, respspec is great because it gives the player more choice and therefore, in some points of view, way more agency. But now let's talk about the drawbacks of respec, because there's a lot of people who really do not like respec. For some players, respspec lessens the impact of player decisions. It cheapens player decisions Knowing that anything you choose to do on your player can be undone at any time basically means that those decisions didn't matter in the slightest. If you can press a button and undo all this leveling and build choices that you spent hours gaining, that feels cheap. It also feels very gamey, so if your game has a very strong basis of immers, immersion and player choice and consequence respect can undo all of that, you're basically undermining the very thing you say you're trying to do as a, as a goal. And then for designers, I've seen respspec be a bad thing in the sense that it encourages very what I would call loose design. I've talked about deadend or dead — uh, dead — levels where you go up and there's not much to buy. Who cares? Maybe, maybe people will respspec at that level. So there's still choices they could make.

I've talked about dead-end builds that can't finish the game. Who cares? You can just respspec, and now, that same character can finish the game with a new build.

Maybe I've talked about un, maybe you know we've talked about unbalanced characters, um, or even unbalanced areas, Um, I'm not going to tell you a particular game, but you know what I'm talking about — where you went to a certain area and all the creatures were resistant or even immune to fire. And there you are with your firespec mage and you can do nothing. So your only option is to respspec into something like I don't know, frost, all these things, unwinable builds, all that stuff, All of those things.

Why worry about them? Why worry about your game design at all, knowing that there's a button the player can press and just respect their character? It also means that if anybody complains about it, you can just go: "What are you complaining about? Just respect it" turns the bad design from a designer. It turns it into a player problem. Oh, when this bad thing happens, I've given you something to do, so it's not bad anymore. For a lot of designers and a lot of players that doesn't fly.

Now I mentioned earlier single player games having respe. For some single player RPGs, respspec can be a good thing. It can be something that lets players jump above between different builds and explore the game differently and see all the different reactivity and nonlinearity. Your game has to offer different builds. But for many single player games it's not such a good idea. If, you have a single player game but you control a party, respspec can make all those characters feel like tools and not a group you're actually trying to roleplay.

They're basically characters that fulfill a role and that role can be. Changed if you find the need for a new role. Especially in online multiplayer games — you frequently find people saying, "We need this type of spe — specialized healer". So then you have to respspec, not because you want to, because you find it hard to get in a group unless you have that particular speck healer or speck mage or spec damage dealer. So respect turns into something that isn't what you want, It's something that's kind of being forced on you, and I think that's a bad idea. So is respect good or bad, like every feature I've talked about on this channel. There are players who love it and won't buy a game that doesn't have it because it doesn't respect their time. Respect and respect go hand in hand. There are other players who are like: I won't buy a game if it has respect. I, I hate respect, if your game has respect, I don't buy it.

And then there's — those are probably are both minority opinions. But then there's a slightly larger group.

That's like, depending on the style of your game, like I'll take respspec in a multiplayer game but I won't get it in a single player game or vice versa. They have narrowing uh areas where they will accept respspec and other ones they don't.

So all I can tell you is I've used it in a few of my games. I haven't used it in other my games. Some of the ones I didn't use it, wasn't because I consciously chose to do it literally wasn't a tool in my tool chest that I thought about.

Like everything, it depends on your design goals. So I — I stress this all the time When you're making your game, you obviously have design goals in mind. If respect fulfills those goals, put it in. If it doesn't, leave it out. Know, though, that no matter which one you pick, there is a subsection of players that won't play your game, because they either demand respect or reject it. So, again, make it based on the game you're trying to make and not what you think is going to make the game more playable to people or sell more. Anyway, I hope that answers your question. Protect one cloud.
