+++
title = "Canonical Endings"
date = "2024-03-12"
id = "V6rDgA5NXQc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Player Choice", "Narrative Design"]
summary = "I talk about my thoughts about the canonical endings to games...or how to pick what ending is the best/right/correct/expected ending when considering a game or its sequel."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about canonical endings, and by canonical endings I mean the ending of the of a game that is considered to be the right ending, or the correct ending, or the true ending or, at the very minimum, the ending the developer expected you to have.

Now, for nonlinear role playing games, that there's only one ending. Everybody has the exact same experience and then experiences the one ending that there is, and that's the canonical ending. But for a lot of my games, which were nonlinear, multiple ending, very choice and consequence-based games, finding the canonical story ending can be tough.

Um, I know, when we were making Fallout, the person who was working on the guide, the play guide, kept asking us: well, what's the player supposed to do, how's this section supposed to be done? And we didn't have an answer for him. We said, well, it really depends on what the player decides to do and what kind of character he's playing and what he happens to choose to do in that moment. So it was hard, if it was hard to write just a walkthrough of the game, you could imagine what they did when they got to the ending and they're like: well, what's, how's it supposed to end?

Now? The reason you need to come up with a canonic, canonical story ending is because if you're making a sequel, you kind of need to have a jumping off place. Now, bear in mind, I've only made one sequel so far in my career and that was Fallout 2. So I'm GNA. I'm going to talk about four different ways. You can pick a canonical ending or indicate which ending you think is canonical if you're making a squl. Bear in mind, I've only done this once, so I'm going to start with the one we did for that. So the first technique is: look for the commonalities and all the endings and just assume those commonalities and nothing else.

For Fallout 2 that's what we ended up doing. We knew the player had survived, we knew the master and the Army had been destroyed and we knew the player was kicked out of the Vault. So, given those elements and nothing else — because a lot of other things could have been very different — what happened to all the different townships, um, who lived and who didn't? We assumed for Fallout 2 just those three things and then jumped forward. Now we did assume Tandy had lived because we made her the head of the NCR. So I guess we did one other thing besides that, but the when we moved forward we basically said: let's not reference too many things that the player did, just reference things that the player probably an area the player probably moved through and had some interaction with. So that's one way you can look at what the what the commonalities of all the endings are and make that commonality your canonical ending. Another way you can do it is just to pick one and say that was the canonical one. Um, for Arcanum 2 we said, well, we're just going to assume the player defeated Kyan and we're going to assume at some point they had learned about Franklin Payne the great Explorer. And then from those two things we're just going to say, okay, we're going to make Arcanum 2 based on that kind of ending.

For one, when I was working on Temple of Elemental Evil — and I know I mentioned this before — I had grandiose plans for that. I wanted Temple to move into against the Giants, the G1, 2 and 3 Series, and then I wanted to go into The Descent, Into the Depths, the D series, and finally, Queen of the demon, web pits, the Q Series, which is now called the adq mega module. I wanted to do that, so for temple 2, going into against the Giants, we were going to assume the good ending for temple, the one where you went down to the bottom of the temple, encountered Zug Moy, fought her and banished her. You didn't join her, you didn't, um, let her join you, didn't become the ultimate Evil yourself. We kind of assume the good ending where she was banished, and that's how we're going to start temple 2. So that's the second way, just pick one of your endings and say that's the canonical one. The Third Way is to let the player pick what ending they want to call the canonical one.

You can do this in a lot of ways. You can ask questions about what the player did or would have. Done had they played through the story and then base your new sequel storyline based on That's what they did for Witcher 3, and that's a really interesting way of doing it I mean it lets the player select different things each time they replay the game and see how their starting situation would be different. In a way, it's a really cool way of doing ins slides — uh, but not until you buy the next game, and not with end slides that you basically pick the conditions and then boom, that's what the world starts like for you. So I like that.

Never did that, and then the fourth way of doing canonical endings is to let the player produce a save game from the previous game and the new game looks at all the tracking variables, because that save game is going to be full of all the tracking variables it's keeping. For achievements, for end slides, for NPC reaction and from there see what the player actually did and base the subsequent game on that. I think the mass effects did that, which is a pretty cool way of doing it. I've never done that either, so those are all the four ways I can think of doing it, which is, of all your endings, pick a common, the commonalities, or just say one is canonical, or let the player pick one that's canonical, or let the player have his old save game be scanned and you start the sequel based on that. I can't think of another way of handling canonical endings. But since I really didn't do a lot of sequels, I didn't really have to think about it. But a lot of people have been asking what I think about conical endings and I think that's all my thoughts on the matter. So I hope that answers questions about how I would select the one best right ending to one of my games.
