+++
title = "Min Player Spec"
date = "2025-08-20"
id = "vD_wH0Qp4Vw"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design", "Balance"]
summary = "I talk about minimum player specification, something every game developer consciously or unconsciously designs their game for."
references = ["IHyQlBNHJEk", "zN-mq4xh55A", "wUI6LZaCKCg", "NLFXroidQtk", "vp17yIB6Ijo"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about min player spec.

You may wonder what I'm talking about. This is a complicated topic. I've put off talking about it literally for years because it is complex and it is nuanced And I've thrown out those words before in previous video topics that I thought were had had that nuance to it. People still took the wrong thing, so I'm going to be very clear and careful. Also, this is a topic I don't talk about with a lot of other game developers because it requires a certain amount of experience actually making games before you get why this is important. I don't hear game players talk about this much at all.

Well, outside the whole get good community, which I don't think they intend this, but we'll see. So you've heard of minspec for machines. I have a whole video about it, about this.

Game won't work unless your computer has a certain processor, a certain amount of memory, a certain video card. There exists the same concept for players. For a particular game, there is a minimum specification for the player who's expecting to be playing It's unstated. It's something that people don't talk about, but it is there And, in a nutshell, what I mean by this is what is the bare minimum that you expect from any player to play this game.

And it can be a wide range of things. It could be reflexes. This game requires the player to notice an attack coming in and, within a certain narrow time frame, do a block or a parry or a counterattack. It might be stamina, there might be a place in places in the game where it requires you to be able to use your controller or the keyboard at a high rate of speed for a certain amount of time. It may be willingness to ignore certain friction points in the game — that they're there. To provide pacing. It may be a minimum level of jank that the game is literally trying to be so complicated that some areas are going to be kind of janky. Because they want that complexity. The designers chose that complexity.

It might be inability to work in a group. Maybe it's a multiplayer game and you have to work in coordination with a group and some people cannot do that and that means they don't meet that minimum spec for the game. Or it could be that you need a good leader. If you've ever played a good uh raid in an MMO where it's about 25, 30, 40 people up against one big boss — that's super, super powerful — you know how important that leader is and how important his leadership qualities can be.

And some people don't have that And that means they're not going to do that. They're not going to be. A leader in a raid. It has nothing to do with the game and everything to do with a player's own talent. Now, statistically, you may be going "I don't know what you're talking about". Statistically, if you play a lot of games, you have at least played one game where you were below the expected minimum player spec in one of those things I just mentioned and you may have walked away from that game saying "That game's stupid, That's a dumb game or they expect too much". And you look around and you see a lot of people playing and enjoying the game. Many people still want to blame the game, but it's it may be you And, like I said, this isn't a blame, the gamer It's. This isn't a good game for you. It's why I say there are no bad games, there are just games that aren't good.

For you. This is part of that. What I want to talk about here is a fundamental understanding of mechanics that if you want to make a richer, complex game, your minsspec is you expect a minimum level of comprehension of those mechanics from your player base.

I'm not talking about accessibility, I'm not. This is not a blame the gamer, This is entirely you realizing as a game developer. At some point to enjoy this game, the player will have to understand it. Now I've told you I've never done anything but making games, but a lot of my friends worked retail and they've all had a variation on this story.

Customer comes in to buy something, there are signs everywhere saying you have 30 days to make a return. The when you cash them out, when you're the cashier and you run them out, you're like "Hey, we have a 30-day return policy. On the receipt it says there's a 30-day return policy. Every friend of mine who works in retail has a story of someone coming in and trying to return something 60,, 90,, six months later and being told: "Well, we have a 30-day return policy being".

No one told me that It's on your receipt. I didn't read that. It's on the sign right here. Uh, I'm not. Oh, I shouldn't be expected to read things. Guess what. The store at that point is not at fault And I'm not saying that the. That person shouldn't shop there, but at some point they need to understand the transaction that's occurring and that's on them.

Let me give you an example from a game. Let's say you're making a game and it has perks. We all understand perks. Let's say one of the perks changes some fundamental basic feature of the game. Let's just use: an example.

You have a perk that gives you a huge damage bonus when you hit someone, but your skill points, if you take that perk, your skill points when you level up are hald. From that point on you only get half the number of skill points. Let's say, you put it in the game, You start getting reports from QA, from testers in QA and from other people on the development team. Hey, there's bugs, I'm not getting the right number of skill points, Something's wrong.

Now at this point you have a lot of options of what you can do. You can do nothing. You can take those bugs and close them out as working as intended. You can rewrite the perk description to really put that part about having the skill points in maybe all caps, or a different font or different size font or different color font for you coloring people. To drive home: hey, if you pick this perk, your skill points going to be haved. Maybe you even go so far as to make a pop-up that if they pick that perk, a pop-up comes up and said: you are acknowledging that. You understand your skill points will be haved from now on. You might even just go: "Oh, let's just change it, This isn't working" And you change the penalty of the perk. Maybe you change that perk to say: "And you get fewer criticals". You do more damage but get fewer criticals. Or maybe you just delete the perk altogether And you're like: "This is not working, People aren't getting this. I delete the perk" And the character — anybody who took it, that player character — now has an unspent perk point.

Okay, I think everybody gets. These are options you can do during development. But here's what, if I asked you the same question after the game has shipped. So the game's already out there, Players are playing it and they're reporting this as a problem. People are going online saying "This is an issue. They're sending it in to your company saying "Hey, there's a bug". You have the same options to make the changes. You could make those same changes in a patch and apply it.

But should you? And even if you decide to do it in that one, what should you do? What should be your criteria? How many people have to complain for you to no longer design that way? How many complaints you have to get? When do they have to arrive?

What do players do when you explain, "Oh, it's because you took this perk" And they're like "Oh, silly me, You're right". Is that enough? Or is there a minimum they expect from the players and say "I'm not going? To do anything, It's working as intended"? That's where the minimum player spec comes in. If you decide to do nothing, it's because you expect a minimum player.

Understanding, now, for some of you may change this into: well, that's the difference between casual and hardcore games. A casual game shouldn't have these kind of perks, but a hardcore one can. You've just reframed min player spec For others. It becomes about bad system design. That's just a bad perk. Should never do it, maybe, but that you've just eliminated a huge class of games because some players won't get that mechanic. Some of you think "Oh, it's a bad UX design, It can always be fixed with UX". Let me just tell you that's not the case. I've seen similar things happen and no amount of user interface will prevent people from saying "I didn't know that was happening.

This is a bad game. That's a bad perk", for some of you, it's about attention, about reading, comprehension. Um, people who make narrative games that have a lot of lore, a lot of text, a lot of dialogue that you have to go through, they often get bugs about people going: "Well, I didn't know this had happened". It's like: "Well, this person you talked to explained it. There was a cut scene or something. It's like I didn't pay attention". How much does the game have to assure that you got what it told you? That's what all this is about. The bottom line here is: what is the minimum player spec for your game?

Whether you consciously think this when you're designing it, exists. You are designing a game for a minimum player ability level And below that you're like: "This person won't be able to play the game". It's the floor, It's you. I expect them to understand this, I expect them to get this, I expect them to be able to do this. And if you turn this issue into, it's always the designer who's at fault, and you always have to adjust it until nobody understands. First of all, I don't think you can ever adjust it so that no one understands a mechanic.

But you also need to be prepared that all the games you make from then on are going to be labeled ultra casual, very simple, uh, too easy, and you will lose another group of players because of that. So, trying to get this bottom 10%, you may lose the top 30%. And again, this isn't blame assignment. This is literally how it works When you go to put your game up somewhere.

This is what people look at. This is what people are thinking.

I'm not saying it's the customer's fault. I'm saying you did not make a conscious choice to decide what your demographic was. It's all about, again, the minimum of what you expect from your player base.

Just to put it in context, there has been recent popular puzzle games that I can't play because they don't have color blindness options. Now, this is an accessibility issue, but the reason I bring it up is the choice to put in color-based games and not put in a color blindness option. Is the designer choosing color vision as a minimum player spec, Even though that's one that could and maybe even should be gotten rid of with an accessibility option?

There's a whole host of games out there — and I'm sure you know the ones I'm talking about — that rely on player reactivity. Player you know reaction speed to enjoy And if you can't dodge that monster's attack, if you can't block it with your shield, if you can't parry within a very narrow window, you can't play or enjoy the game. And they do not provide options to increase those windows, because that's the whole point of the game. Those games have a minimum player spec. So that's just something I want to throw out there for all you budding game developers and all you experienced game developers who don't consciously think of your minimum player spec. It's something you need to do, maybe you don't want to talk about it because of the people who misconstrue it, as you're just blaming your players, but it is something you need to think about. You need to think: who am I making this game for? And one of those thoughts you need to think through is: who are the people I'm not making this game for? I encourage you to think those thoughts at some point during the development of your game. Anyway, those are my thoughts today.
