+++
title = "Pros And Cons Of GURPS As A CRPG"
date = "2024-09-25"
id = "Vf-RLWZW7lI"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Fallout", "GURPS", "RPG Design"]
summary = "I talk about my experience of converting GURPS into code for use in Fallout."
references = ["efCn85Tvrf8", "kgPwfHXiBjw", "jHIabSKo26U"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about the pros and cons of gerps as a computer role playing game, specifically what I learned trying to implement gerps as a computer game for Fallout.

This is to answer a question from player one fanatic who asks about, quote, giving a deep dive on gerps that was originally in Fallout. What skills, advantages, disadvantages and other game mechanics were implemented?

How did they work and how did they differ from the pen and paper vers version? This is a good question and I I do have an answer, but I have a, of course, what's becoming now kind of standard. I have my.

Let's start with my caveats, first of all, I don't have the gerps version of Fallout. When we switched from uh gerps to special, I completely archived everything about the game. I had a running executable. I had all the source code. I made a backup of it I gave a copy of that backup to a VP at interplay who was responsible. For keeping backups, but just to remind people, when I left interplay a few months into Fallout 2 I was told I had to get rid of all that, all my personal copies.

So I did. I destroyed I on my home hard drive. Everything got wiped and the CD that I had made the backup on. That I had my copy of I and Leonard and Jason used to make fun of me for this. I put it in my microwave at my house until it sparkled. I then broke up in multiple pieces and then walked around my neighborhood and threw it out in multiple places — two different parks and a dumpster behind my grocery store.

All got pieces of the CD ROM. That was a backup of all this. So I don't have anything Fallout. All my Fallout notes were from my journal that I kept at home where I at the end. Of the day, go — today, you know, we talked about this, or today I worked on this, or today I got on an argument about this — that's where most of my notes come from.

Um, it's kind of like a diary, but calling it a journal makes it sound more buff. I don't. My notes, unfortunately, don't say a lot about what got implemented and what didn't. I had planned to do an audit towards the end of fallout's development where I'd write a little piece of audit code that would look at every place the game was, referencing an advantage, a disadvantage, a skill in code or script — and count it up and have keep a reference to it so we could look for that.

Never — obviously never — got that, so I am going mostly on memory here, um, which I think is pretty accurate. Um, also, when I finish up, I found, uh, in the internet archives, um, the FAQ on the old interplay site about gerps, so also want to remind people this is about the implementation of gerps. I'm not going to go into the whole situation about gerps being removed. Um, I don't really like thinking about that situation. I don't think anybody acted or reacted well on any side of that me interplay SJ games. I just think it was a lot of angry, emotional, frustrating times.

So what I want to talk about is when I went to implement gerps. How was that? And if you remember, I had a video where I talked about making a curs g GS character generator where you could, you know, an editor where you could put together a grip's character, which meant I had to already code attributes, skills, advantages, disadvantages into a library that became my G's Library. It was used. By the character editor, it was used by the game. So one of the huge advantages of gerps was a. I already knew it really well. I had started playing it in grad school. So by the time we started implementing gerps I had already been playing it for probably five or six years, probably close to seven years. I've been playing it regularly, like once, at least once a week.

I'd played it with people at interplay too. So Not only was it a system that was well known for me because I had made the gerps character editor program, it was already well defined the problem space of getting these things implemented. I already had something that controlled making a character. What I needed to do now was Implement that in the game, and let me just tell you that gerps, more than a lot of other tabletop RPGs I'm looking at, you, D and D — seemed welld designed for computers, meaning that it was easy to Define structures for things like skills and advantages and disadvantages. They were well defined in the game.

This is what a skill is, this is what attribute it defaults to or other skill it defaults to. This is how it works, there were even, under some skills and just game mechanics. I seem to remember like, uh, the rules for being damaged or whatever. It looked like case statements from a big switch statement it looked that well thought out, like somebody logical already walked through gerps and when it was written as a tabletop RPG and laid everything out in a really nice way, as opposed to The Dandy books which were filled with.

Here's a rule, and then here's an exception to the rule and here's an exception to the exception. And oh, by the way, this gets. Overridden all the time. I think I told you the number of times. It was like: here's a sleep spell. By the way, sleep doesn't work on elves. But then you go to a module and goes, a sleep gas gets released. That works just like the Sleep spell, except this does work on elves, and it's like: oh so gerps didn't have that. That was a huge plus to implementing it imp coding gerps was soothing to my programmer brain, so let's talk about some of the cons, though. Um, GS was not very well known, so almost everyone on my team I had to teach gerps and this made me worried.

O when we ship, how many people who are buying a new interplay RPG are even going to know what girs is? And those who will — and this is the worst part — those who do know what it is are going to. Have expectations. This is what I've realized as I've gotten older. I would much rather make my own IP than work in someone else's, because tabletop RPG players have expectations — and this has going to sound surprising, so I hope you're sitting down.

Some of their expectations are unreasonable. They want a computer to be able to do, to adjudicate the rules like a human being would do, and you just can't do that. You have to try to anticipate what the player is going to try to do and how that interacts with the rules. And if you, Ma, if you manage to, not if you miss a case or your rule is a little too rigid, it, just it. People expectations get um missed and then they get really upset. Like I said too, grips was not quite as universal as it was touted, both in people knowing it I don't.

Think anyone at interplay knew it. Uh, I think I like I brought GS to interplay and was teaching people.

It is a tabletop, but it's also not Universal in the sense of it works for a lot of things. If you buy the basic set and you have attributes, skills, advantages and disadvantages, you would think, hey, great, I can do magic. Magic is going to be skills, right, or there's going to be like an advantage for like, having major or whatever.

Yes and no, there were a lot of extensions. Spells were extensions, cyanic abilities were EXT extensions and they worked kind of like what was already there, but a lot of not. Basically there was there were extensions for everything that didn't fit neatly into skills, advantages and disadvantages. So that meant that that when you went to code something like that, it was, it was unique, it required unique code, which is why we tried to avoid stuff like that in Fallout. Didn't want magic, didn't want psionics, didn't want those things, I just wanted this a joke in house, I just wanted the basic set um.

Another problem I had with gerps that you really notice when it's a computer RPG is how health and specifically within combat, how that pacing goes. I know I've said this summer before, I don't remember, but in D and D, because you have a lot of hit points, combat tends to go like this: at least after first level. And first level you can still with a, mage who has a D4, they're like: I'm fine, I'm dead. But in D and D what it usually goes like this is: you enter combat, you get hit. You're like, oh my goodness, this thing's hitting for a lot. You get hit again.

You're like this is bad, I need. A heal, I'm not going to survive this. You get hit again and it's like, oh, this is bad, I can't survive another one. You get hit again and you die, or at the point where you didn't get that heal, you run away.

That's not how gerps worked. Gerps tended to work like this: you only had as many hit points as your health attribute, and this is again without any extensions. People were like: well, you, there were extensions for that. Yes, there are.

I'm talking about the basic set, so grips tended to work like this because guns and basically anything Hightech, anything more than a sword, tended to do more damage than anybody would have as health. So it tended to work like this: you enter combat, Dodge, block dead, and so it went from. You look like you were fine, you were perfectly healthy.

Couple things happen and then you're. Dead. The, pacing, the ability for the player to go — ooh, this combat may be too hard for me is not there, because even and if, the thing attacking you, if their skill was so high that you weren't dodging, or your Dodge skill wasn't very good, tended to be — you enter combat and boom, you're immediately knocked, unconscious or dead. So that was an issue. We were already talking about fixing that with more extensions and adding in getting extra Health every level, which? Or giving you points and strongly suggesting that you buy extra Health. But this is already causing some issues with play test, because if you didn't force people to buy Health, the game got quickly unplayable. So let me try to directly answer player one fanatic's question about what got implemented and what was different, and I'll remind you, IID planned to make an audit. Um, I, had planned to make an appendix, just like Temple of Elemental Evil had, where I said: here's what God implemented, here's what didn't and the things that God implemented, here's what was different about them.

There, were several things in gir's Fallout that were very straightforward to implement. We had guns, we had Spears, we had daggers or knives, swords, we had things like that that were relatively easy to put in. It was: here's the attribute of defaults to here's how it works, here's your chance of hitting, here's how much damage it does if the opponent doesn't Dodge. That was pretty easy to implement. A lot of the healing rules were pretty easy to put in. It was a very defined system with healing skills, um, healing items and how they worked. Also, dialogue, using skills and dialogue and grips had a lot of skills you could use.

Um, I remember us talking. About how we were going to work in savwa Fair, like where, in the Fallout Wasteland, we were like: I savwa fair, that NPC. We wanted to put it in, though, and then there were reaction rules to cover how NPCs reacted to this, so that was a lot of stuff that we could get implemented pretty directly. There were some things we wanted to put in, but we weren't quite sure if it was being working correctly. The one I remember the most was there was a color blind disadvantage in gerps. We had planned — and this was something I pointed out, it was trivial to do — we were going to grayscale the game and all the user interfaces. So if you picked color, if your character was color blind, you saw the game in Gray scale. Actually, I believe I did it in brown scale, so it was kind of a CPUs scale. Um filter and we were going to put in a few color-based puzzles.

The one I remember was there was a bomb trap and the way to disarm it was: if you had a good dialogue skill, you get the NBC to tell you or you if you were stealth around. There was a schematic for the bomb and a safe and you could discover: cut the red wire. But if you're color blind, when the interface comes up all the wires are gray or brown or whatever.

Now that was a quite a bit of work for maybe what? Two or three color-based puzzles in the entire game. But also we ran into a problem of what if the player is color blind and his character isn't. He still can't do that.

Um, it's funny — I almost said here or she, but there are so few female colorblind players, but I guess I should. I have color blind sisters, so he or she is going to. The player is going to have trouble doing that puzzle even though their character's not colorblind. So there was no way to reverse correct for that. So that, right, there was making a scratch our heads. But then there were things that would require a lot of implementation changes to make work in a computer RPG, especially when there's no human to interpret.

One of them was animal handling. Um, what exactly are you supposed to get out of it if you go up, if, some rats are attacking you and you do your animal handling? Was it just going to make them stop attacking? If they follow you're supposed to be able to give them directions. You're supposed to be able to get them to do things. I didn't, I didn't know how to make that work, would they suddenly?

Get dialogues and you control them through that? When you got dog meat with animal handling going to, let you do more things with dog meat than somebody without animal handling, we weren't sure. Then there were things that that don't even matter in our game, like — let's look at animal handling again.

Was that working on rats? They were technically giant rats. Um and the Brahman were two headed brahen. These were mutations, if it worked on them, was it going to work on giant scorpions? Or were giant scorpions somehow considered monsters even though giant rats weren't?

What about centur? Those things were made out of human parts, but they were effectively just animals. I wasn't sure we were eventually going to have to make a call on that and we weren't sure what we were going to do.

Now about that time is when we lost the gerps license, so we replaced everything with special and we skirted all those issues by because we already had content made. We knew what we didn't have. We weren't sure how to control, so we just didn't put anything in for that and we switched a lot of the other skills because it was all modular. I just ripped out the gerps library, stuck in a new one.

We had new skills, we had new attributes, we had, um, new advantages, which were perks. We didn't really have any disadvantages, although the way we implemented traits used an underlying. You know the plus and minus for ads and dis ads. We just SM smushed them into one new thing, caught a trait. But I did find an FAQ on the original Fallout site where I answered a couple questions and so I'm going to read them here.

How true to real gerps will the computer version be? And I wrote very close. We'd like to think that the computer version will be as close as you can get to playing gerps, short of playing girps. We're paying close attention to combat and injury rules and we plan to make an entire Suite of functions to handle reaction rules in case anyone makes a charismatic, very beautiful character with voice and sex appeal. And then there's another question: are all of the skills in the ger basic set used? No, we're only including those skills that can be used in the game, but that includes an awful lot of them. Similarly, we're only including the, advantages and disadvantages that make a difference in the game. For example, if getting five points for being a unic doesn't really hurt you in Fallout, we're not going to put unic in the game. We also can't really Implement blindness, blind the blindness disadvantage, unless we turn off the screen. So we're not we're leaving that out, but most of the basic set is being implemented, if only because we plan to use those skills extensively in future genres.

We're already planning to make games past Fallout anyway. Uh, player one fanatic. I hope this answered your question. This is as deep a dive as I can go.

Somewhere out there may be my computer backed up from interplay with notes and a working version of gerps. The way it ran before it switched to special, I don't know, um out of my hands. So I hope that answered your question as much as I could.
