+++
title = "Multiple Quest Solutions"
date = "2023-12-28"
id = "vlkksy6casU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Fallout", "Quest Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about multiple Quest Solutions and I want to use an example from Fallout that I used in my talk at the reboot conference in 2017."
references = ["5l7YcGCQ5Ck"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about multiple Quest Solutions and I want to use an example from Fallout that I used in my talk at the reboot conference in 2017.

So that is rescuing Tandy from the Raiders. So this is the map. It happens on very simple map. I should point out one building couple tents — sorry, it's shown here — after killing some guards or some Raiders.

Um, the context here is you meet Tandy in Shady Sands when you first go there. When you go back to Shady Sands, she will have been kidnapped by Raiders and aradesh asks you to go. Her dad asked you to go rescue her.

The reason I always liked the showing this particular Quest and its Solutions is it reminds me of my early gerps role playing, where I'd make a very simple dungeon but it would play very differently depending on the skills of the player characters who went through it I talk about that in one of the Fallout videos about how gerps influenced Fallout. So let me walk you through this very simple map and all of the solutions that exist for rescuing Tandy. I'm going to number them in increasing order of complexity, and by complexity I mean it's a combination of how hard it is for the player to figure out how to do this, but also how hard it was for the developers to make that Quest solution, and that's really what I want to get at when I after I talk about all these. So the simplest way to rescue Tandy is just kill all the cons, just go in there, kill them all and get her out of the cell. It's straightforward, it's already supported by the game. You just kill all the NPCs.

They're hostile to you anyway. And well, yeah, I think they're mostly hostile to you.

I know you can talk to the leader, but anyway, I'll get to that. This is the simplest solution. It's pretty much the straightforward solution of almost any Quest: just kill everybody and take what you want. There's another solution, number two, which was also pretty easy to figure out and also pretty easy to implement, which is: you go around, you, sneak and you go around the back, you quietly kill the two guards at the rear of the building and then you sneak in and you have to pick the lock to get Tandy out of the cell she's in. Again, all of this is supported by the game systemically. Yes, you can kill those guards and if you don't make a lot of noise, no one else will hear you, and then you can pick the lock on that cell if you have a pretty decent lock pick skill.

The third solution is similar, but I I pull it apart. From the second solution because it uses a different skill, which is you still kill those two guards at the back and sneak into the building from on the rear door. But if you don't have lockpick, you can use Dynamite on the cell door to blow it open. Now, there's no hard and fast rule of how to do this, but that explosive does make noise, so you should wait until anybody who's outside the building has moved away — any of them that are moving — so that there's less likely a chance they hear the noise and come investigate. And then the fourth solution: you can go up to the leader garl and enter dialogue, and I think if you don't have any of the skills I'm going to mention, from now on there's not a lot of options here, but if you have at least a 45 speech skill, you can.

Intimidate him to get her, to get him just to release Tandy. So that's solution four. Solution five: you can try to purchase her. That doesn't require speech skill, but you do have to have the money. So that's a.

The first one was restricted by your speech skill. This, uh, with the, first dialogue one solution four is restricted by your speech skill. This solution five is restricted by you having money. The sixth solution is: sixth solution is you can tell goo that you will fight him oneon-one and in unarmed combat and if you win you get to take Tandy.

Now this is an interesting one because there's no restriction exactly, I think, on you being able to get this. But the only way to really do this: you're going to have to have a pretty decent unarmed skill. You probably want a pretty decent strength. So the damage you do from unarmed is pretty high and you probably need to be on a high enough level that you have enough hit points that you can take some hits from garl. Garl is pretty strong, so that was solution six. Solution seven and the seventh solution that I know of to this scenario is — this is something that a scriptor added — it has a lot of preconditions. If you're a male character and you have a Lu out of at least nine and you're either wearing leather armor or you're using a stealth Boy, when you talk, you can get by the guards, and then when you talk to garl, there's a chance that he will think you're his dead father, then you need at least — uh, there's — a minimum intelligence. I think it's six and it's a charismo speech.

Check you can, then, once garl thinks you're his father, you can. Go with it, roll with it and get him to release Tandy. So that's a lot of prerequisites. It's one of those solutions that, when I discovered it, I'm like: okay, this can only really go in because we have the other ones. It is hard to find.

I'm not. I would love to know if anybody figured this out on their own when they were playing, or if it was discovered later when they dug through the data files. And also, if I was to implement this one today, I'd probably say it works with a female character and garl thinks you're his mother. CU, we had male, female divisions in the speech dialogue in the dialogue files, so why not go with that, okay?

Here's what I think is interesting, though, about these seven Solutions: the first three completely systemic, and what I mean by that is once you put in the building. And the guards set their factions, put Tandy in a room and marked it as locked, those three solutions required no additional code support, no scripting, no dialogue, nothing. They just worked, and that's one of the things that I think was successful in Fallout is right there. Just with the way the code is written and skills were made, you have three solutions to a quest without anything special being done: boom and one's combat — and the other two are stealth. Now the latter four Solutions all needed scripting and, in particular, they're dialogue related. So whether you intimidate garl with a speech, skill, purchase uh Tandy with money, fight Garo and unarmed combat, or Pretender his father, those all required Associated dialogue. Short of using AI these days, I'm not sure how you can avoid this, but just so you know the repeated dialogue subt trees that I saw in a lot of Fallout dialogues, things about asking money for something, um, trying to say an insult, um, I'm trying to think if there was another one, maybe. Maybe asking to persuade someone or lie — these were things that that encouraged me to make the generated dialogue in Arcanum, which I've talked about in another video, and the reason for this is two things. One, it felt like a complete waste of resources and time to remake all those dialogue subt trees, the text for them, the space they used in the dialogue files, the space they used in our localization files that we were Rel localizing very similar strings, but they weren't identical.

It's like: hey, I want to ask for money. Hey, give me some money. Oh sure, I'll accept a bribe.

Those variants that occurred. They were never written the same way twice.

So we had all these places in the game where someone would ask you for money and we had to localize all of them separately. The other thing that led to generated dialogue was all of those also required some scripts to control, to take the money from the player, to check that the player had enough money, and all the scriptors did it differently sometimes. If you didn't have enough money, it wouldn't even offer the option. Others let you ask for it, but then the person would like: hey, you don't have enough money. The other person would ask: other people would script it so you could ask for it. They'd say okay, and then you would say I don't have enough money. And the fact that they were done in the simple thing, was done in all those different ways, annoyed me because it made the game feel uh, inconsistent. So what I loved about the multi — quest Solutions in Fallout: were two things: one, that a lot of them fell out systemically and two, the ones that did require extra work were almost always dialogue and that which let me an Arcanum to doing generated dialogue to help support just those things to make easier, to make it easier and more consistent for narrative designers to include those things in the game, which then led to more, Quest Solutions.

The easier you make things, the more your designers and other developers will do more things. So more tools mean more things. Anyway, that's what I wanted to talk about today is multiple Quest Solutions: how they pop out systemically and the ones that don't. You can assist in how they're made. So I hope that helps if you want to make multiple Quest Solutions in your own games.
