+++
title = "Fallout SPECIAL Attribute Effects"
date = "2023-06-28"
id = "VxIisf8fQtE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Fallout", "Character Systems"]
summary = "I talk about the systemic (i.e. coded) effects of the SPECIAL attributes in the first Fallout game."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about the attributes in Fallout, the special attributes.

Now I'm going to talk about exactly what they do. Part of the reason I want to do this is that almost a year ago, someone on Reddit was saying how they like games that have luck in them, and I explained what luck did in Fallout like in detail and I realized I had a document that about the time we shipped her shortly after, I wrote down exactly what all the attributes did, and I still have that document, um. But I know I had originally written it down on paper, so I went to go look for it. And what I was looking for, by the way, I found this: is a original Fallout shirt that still says gurps on it.

I've never even worn this shirt. I found it in a box while I was looking for the paper version of my notes on special. I couldn't find them, so this started a broader search. I looked for my original physical notes that I know I had a few from rags to riches, and I couldn't find those. So then I went looking for a programming book that I bought when I was in High School or maybe very early college, that I used on the very first game I worked on, grandstand Bridge, which was written in C, and I know I had that book. I remember packing that book. I cannot find that book.

So I'm now worried that at least one box got lost when I moved up here — and I'm almost positive I know what happened. We, um, we moved using a pod, because it was middle of covid, where they drop an empty POD at your house and you fill it up yourself and then they take it to your new house and you empty it yourself. Problem was I injured my leg. Before the move I had already boxed up the house but I I could barely walk. So I ended up hiring movers to fill the Pod and I had a box of junk stuff and a box of things that were going to friends and at least once I found that the movers would bring things down from upstairs and set them in the living room to take out to the Pod. But they set it right next to the junk pile and one time I said that's not junk and moves like I know I'll get it I now worry that know, I know I'll get it I now worry that one of those boxes was placed really close to junk and was left there by the movers and then by me. So now it's gone.

Nothing's been lost because I digitized all those notes, but I'm really bummed because I wanted the physical. Copies, especially because I had pictures drawn on them. So those are gone.

Um also means, though, that because I found a bunch of shirts — uh, no danger of me repeating a shirt — I know I accidentally repeated a spaces Choice shirt once, so I've already technically repeat insurance, but I can go for a while now. But new shirt, so I thought this is appropriate, since I want to talk about Fallout. The thing about what I'm going to talk about is, I don't know. I'm going to talk about the systemic effects of the attributes. There were scripts that checked your attributes, and of course they're checked in dialogue, and I didn't go through all of that.

I would have to play the game multiple times to figure that out. It'd be a lot easier if I could just search through the files but the. So these are the systemic effects and I'm not going to include things like prereqs for perks, because that's obvious.

I'm going to talk about the things that each attribute does in code, so that when you spend points on them, this is what they're doing. So I will go through them in special order. And also I have noticed that there's some of the wikis I checked are wrong. Mostly they're incomplete, meaning they don't list all the things every attribute does. Some of them are also incorrect, kind of implying that an attribute does something and it's not exactly what they do. So this is accurate as far as I can tell exactly how we shipped Fallout.

So let's start with s for strength. So strength improves your base skill in unarmed and melee. So as you up, your strength through base skill got higher, so you didn't have to put any as many points in it.

Later. It also increased your hit points, your melee damage and your carry amount and those are just automatic. They just added right because those derived stats inside the game. It also reduces your hit chance, if you're below the Min strength for a weapon, your hit chance with that weapon is reduced for every Point you're below that Min strength. Strength also increases the range of any Throne weapon, not a ranged weapon, but anything you threw like a grenade or um. We had a couple like I think we had throwing knives and a couple other things you could throw.

By the way, that adds to the heath ho perk. So the hevo perk increased the range of Throne weapons. That added that was additive with strength, so if you had both you could throw really far. So the next one is in special is perception and perception.

Improved your base skill in first aid: doctor, lock, pick and traps. Perception also improves your sequence in combat. So when you got your sequence determined, where you were going to go in the turn-based order, the higher your perception, the earlier you went.

Uh, it also increased the range of. It also increased the range for both ranged and thrown weapons before a distance penalty would kick in. So normally the farther away somebody was, the lower your two hit would become. Perception increases the radius at which there is no penalty and then it starts to drop off after that. So somebody really far away is less of a penalty if you have a high perception than a low, because it didn't stop dropping off until quite a distance and so it doesn't drop off as far person.

So the next one in special was endurance: e. Endurance improved your base scale. Outdoorsman. It also increased your hit points, your heal rate, so you healed, you had more hit points and you healed them faster if you had a high endurance. It also increased your base resistance in both radiation and poison. So that could also be improved with consumables or armor those resistances, but your base. It was additive to your base and your base was higher with ignorance.

Your endurance also. The higher your endurance, the lower the chance is that you will. You will automatically be put up to the next higher radiation thickness level if you had a high enough radiation. The way radiation worked in Fallout, the base game was you. When you took radiation, when you took RADS, the total was kept, but you didn't automatically get sick. What it would do is periodically it would check and if you were at a lower radiation sickness, level than your current rad level indicated, it would only move you up one, it would move you towards it. So you gradually get sick, so you took a ton of radiation at once, you'd get low sick and then a lot sick and then really sick. That chance of going up each time was reduced if you had a higher endurance — you would eventually — of course it was never zeros who eventually would get sick — but you would get sick more slowly if you had a high endurance. And then finally, endurance factored into critical hits in the following way: the chance that a critical headshot would knock you out and was reduced by endurance, the chance that an arm or a leg shot would that limb was reduced with endurance and the fact that a groin shot would either knock you down or knock you out was reduced with endurance, so that gets us up to C: charisma. Charisma improved the base scale and speech and barter. It also improved the reaction that NPCs would have to you. So when you there was a base reaction based on Charisma and then it would be adjusted by things you did and um reputations you could get, and that's it. That's the only thing Charisma did, so I see why a lot of you use it as a dumpstat.

If I was going to remake fall up today, that would change. Um, I do know it also, uh, limited. There was a Charisma limit on how many companions you could get. Yeah, that was something we threw in. It was: some people hated it, some people loved it. Um, the people hated.

It was like, well, now I can't get companions and they're super fun. I'm like, well, you can, you just can't have all of them at. Once and it's not like they had. They talk to each other like The Outer Worlds companions did. But okay, Charisma doesn't do much, so let's go into intelligence, the one that does a lot. So intelligence improved your base skill in first aid, doctor, science, repair and Outdoorsman. It also increased the skill points you got every single time you leveled up, which is a huge problem when you're playing a dumb character, because you get so little skill points and you're already have what?

Five skills below normal, and speaking of dumb intelligence, modified conversation options, not just someone. Some of them you can only get if you're intelligence was high enough. But intelligence also — and this is one I didn't see in a lot of places. Online intelligence controlled how long it took you to read a book to get its benefit. So in Fallout if you found.

Something, you could read it and it would give you a bonus. But it would Fade Out and fade in and say, okay, you've now read this thing and you have this bonus. Time would pass as it was faded out to indicate you were reading. The length of time it took you to read was shortened with higher intelligence.

I don't know if anybody ever noticed that. I don't know if anybody ever cared, but that's what it does.

So then we get to agility. Agility is interesting. It has a very short list of what it does, but it is a very powerful stat. Agility improves the base skill in a lot of skills: small guns, big guns, energy guns, unarmed melee throwing, sneak, lock pick, steel traps — that's a lot. But it also increased both your action points that you got every round and your armor class. Wow, agility was like. The stat um, on paper it looked like, okay, it only does a few things, but just those agility points alone, or the action points alone, make agility, great.

And finally, that brings us to luck, and this is one of the things I wrote on that Reddit post. But actually since I did it, I was like, oh, there was a back page, so here's everything. Luck does one. Luck is the base attribute for gambling. So the higher you put points in luck, you automatically have a higher gambling skill. Luck also increases the chance of a critical success with any skill, both inside and outside combat. So when you pickpocket somebody with steel, you can get a critical success. Um, when you pick a lock, when you, uh, do first aid, all of those can get critical successes more easily if you have a. Higher luck also had a bunch of extra effects inside of combat. So luck increases the chance at any attack becomes a critical success, but it also decreases the chance of any failure becomes a critical failure. Luck also breaks ties between two combatants that have the same sequence number. So I said perception gives you a better sequence number. If your sequence number ties with someone, then the game Compares your luck and the moment the highest luck goes first. Finally, luck increases the chance that a ranged attack which uses the sniper perk becomes a critical hit. So if you take the sniper perk and it says, hey, some of your range attacks become criticals, you get even more with luck. So it's additive with the perk or it I mean it doesn't do it by itself. Once you have the perk, luck kicks in and finally, well, actually no. That's why there's a back page, so, on the world map, luck adds to the chance that you have a special random encounter. But there are minimum luck scores, which means some encounters literally you cannot get unless your luck is high enough. This is why some people would play the game and say: I never encountered the Flying Saucer, or I never found the nuka-cola truck.

If you lower your luck to one, you will not have some special encounters. And finally, and this is the one I totally forgot about, when you shoot someone in the eye, there's a chance it blinds them, but that chance is reduced by luck. So really lucky people will almost never get blinded if they're shot in the eye, and that's it that was everything that was on that. Um, I think that's everything.

Of course, I didn't include perks, and if it was a script? That checked it or dialogue, I didn't look. Also be aware that base Fallout shipped with a bug where you could get critical failures and successes, own skills, but you couldn't get them when you rolled against attributes and that's why there was a like the super computer, Zacks and the glow. He checked against one of your skills when you played him chess and the script would check against critical success and that literally can't happen. So don't know if it ever got modded in, but I know that was something that we never noticed and it got noticed way past when we did the last patch. So I'm not sure. I'm not sure that ever got patched by interplay. I hope it got patched by Mater. Um, be so trivial to fix that. There are a lot of things about Fallout V: trivial to fix. Anyway, I hope that is. A nice definitive list of everything that special does in Fallout.
