+++
title = "Making And Maintaining An IP"
date = "2023-12-08"
id = "waUjJ2VjvaE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["IP", "Publishing"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about making and maintaining an IP."
references = ["kW7gOPHmr-Q", "ohHLUKj3NTk"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about making and maintaining an IP.

By IP, I mean intellectual property, now I've talked about writing design docs and how to make a good setting, so I'm going to link those two videos below. This is something different. I want to talk about intellectual property in general. Intellectual property is more than your setting. It's more than your story. Those are specific to a game.

I'm talking about the intellectual property as a whole: the, tone, the art style, the. It's basically the, distinct Core, Essence of your idea. That's what I think of as an IP. So, yes, it does include the setting, but it's not like Fallout. Setting is a post nuclear World Fallout, the IP Fallout.

The game was this part of Southern California. So that's the difference I'm thinking of about and I want to break this up into making an IP. Like: how, can you tell what a good IP is and you're on a good track to make a good IP? And then maintaining an IP which is doing more things in that IP past the first game, like, sequels.

So let's talk about the making part first. So an IP, like I said, should have a very distinct Core Essence. You should be able to express your IP in a single sentence: um, that is the, [Music], the — as specific, simply stated definition I can think of for a good IP. Maybe it'll take you two sentences, but basically, if you have to write an entire, like three pages to get the idea of your IP across, it's probably too complicated.

Let me give you some examples: um, arcanum's. Arcanum's IP was: uh, sentence was a fantasy world that's undergoing an industrial revolution already. That starts you thinking about things like: oh, my goodness, it's definitely going to have Orcs And elves, but it's also going to have factories and trains and iron mines and unions and pollution, and it just starts you thinking about all these things that aren't normally in a Fantasy Realm. That sentence is evocative, and that's true for any IP you make. I — I think I've mentioned the elevator pitch three-word sentence for The Outer Worlds — was: Fallout meets Firefly. Immediately. That makes you think of all these evocative things. It's going to be set in space, but it's going to have the clunky Tech and the kind of dark um setting that you expect in a Fallout game and the kind of humor that you get in Fallout and Firefly. In addition to that single sentence, I think it's really, really important if your IP can be reduced to and easily recognized by an icon — and there may be more than one icon, but it should be very unique. For example, Fallout: we had the vault door. That.

Geared vault door was very iconic to Fallout. Vault boy, of course, super iconic was — there's hundreds of him appearing in those skill decks, cards and in the manual and in cinematics, Vault. You see Vault boy and you think Fallout, you think you, talk about Fallout, you eventually think about Vault boy. Those two are intertwined.

The The Outer Worlds — we didn't in The Outer Worlds, we didn't go out of our way to do that. But the moonman ended up being our iconic figure and spacer's choice — it's not the best choice, it's spacer's Choice — did become a very recognizable slogan connected to The Outer Worlds, going outside of games. You see this happen everywhere.

Star Wars: the X-Wing Fighter is very distinctive to Star Wars. You don't see things like it in other Sci-Fi movies: the lightsaber — very, very distinctive. For Star Wars it not just its look, its sound, the vibe of it, the idea that people would be using a sword made of light is not only really cool, but showing how you it holds up against you know ray guns. You're like, wow, this makes sense and it's very cool and it easily makes it, like I said, distinct. So when you're making your IP, make sure that your idea is very distinct.

Notice: I didn't say unique, I said distinct. It can be something similar to what people have heard before, but different. So Arcanum being a f standard fantasy world — well, we've seen that a billion times. We even referenced Lord of the Rings and toen as our basis, but it's undergoing an industrial revolution. That's different, now, once you've made an IP, you should be able to write down a lot of simple rules about it. You know about things that do and do not appear in your IP, and this should be true for all the games and not just the sequals, so that people understand this is what belongs in this world and this is what doesn't, and you should make those rules pretty firm.

I've mentioned in the past that I don't like making sequels. I like to move on to new IPS and explore those. Part of the reason I feel this way is: staying in an IP is really hard. It's a hard thing to do because you've already explored it. You already made a game or book or movie that explored that IP.

If you have to keep doing it, one of two things tends to happen. You either find new areas within that IP to explore or You Dig Down Deeper into the area you did before and you have a tendency to overanalyze it. Both of these things that can happen. In a SQL lead to the same problem, which is dilution of the IP. An IP gets diluted when it is now unclear what can and cannot. Appear it when the Crux of the main one is either been overanalyzed or spread out into areas it shouldn't be and just it's just too much it's. You're getting either too much of a good thing or the good thing has been spread out so much that it's no longer a good thing.

And I can give examples. I've mentioned this about Fallout before, so I don't feel like I'm complaining about Fallout in a way I've never done before, but I feel like the Fallout IP is being diluted. I did it myself in Fallout 2. I was the one who added the ghost to the den and I remember um Chris Alon telling me I shouldn't do that. At the time I was like no, I like this, I like putting Supernatural in. But now that I've had years to think about it, Fallout doesn't need Supernatural and it shouldn't have it, because it pushes back the definition of the IP and makes it too broad. Suddenly, and by doing that now the IP for Fallout is diluted.

You have Supernatural stuff, if you have ghosts, why can't you have vampires? Why can't you have afterlife, um poltergeists, um raising people from the dead? You have ghosts, um, you've. You've basically weakened the IP.

I've said this about synths, um which I saw mentioned in and play a little role in Fallout 3 and then are huge in Fallout 4. I don't think they belong, because Fallout went out of its way to establish what kind of Technology it had. Changing that I. I get why people were like: no, it's okay to change it in a sequel. For me, that just broadens the IP and therefore dilutes it and therefore weakens it. The whole point of Fallout — it was supposed to be what the 50s predicted the future would be. Synth, I think, doesn't fit into that, but more so when I when I play some of the later games in the series and I see 50s props everywhere, I'm like, well, this now feels like the war happened in the ' 50s. Not, this is what the 50s predicted the future would be. And here's all the cool Tech and stuff.

So again, the IP has been diluted. And every time you make a sequel, you that's how you run the risk of doing that — you run the risk of kind of weakening the base, core concept of your IP. In fact, the whole summary of this video could be: IPS need to be kept very simple and very distinct, don't. Dilute it, which is exactly what most sequels and extensions of any kind — even Doc's — do this. They run the risk of diluting the IP and making it less strong.

I do like I said at the beginning, I highly recommend you watch my how toite design and how to create a good setting videos. But if you like what I was talking about here, what made me think of this was a really good video on a YouTube channel called like stories of old, and I'll link it below. I think it was called the marelize dive into this dilution and weakening of IP and how that's happened in more recent Cinema than it did in the past, and I think he does a way better job of explaining this than I do. So if you liked what I said here, I'll put the link in for this like stories of old video. Below, and you can watch it, because I think he does a way better job of describing what I'm talking about than I do. Anyway, I hope this helps you make a new IP and understand why I have never been too interested in doing sequels.
