+++
title = "Naming Things"
date = "2024-11-21"
id = "wSKr1T_VsvU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Worldbuilding"]
summary = "Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today, I want to talk about naming things."
references = ["aBptoe19IcY", "9lYuzefVvMA", "vG8WWB_HYho"]
+++

Hi everybody. It's me, Tim. Today, I want to talk about naming things.

What I mean by that is, when you start to put together a game you're going to have to come up with so many names you're going to have to name the game. You're going to have to name items in the game, places in the game, other people in the game. Uh, if it's a space game, you're going to have to come up with — you know fanciful technology names and names for other aliens. If it's a fantasy game, going to have to come up with magical sounding names and you know names that describe magical processes, like: oh no, the wizard has placed Wards on all of the glyph Stones. Whatever, what I want to talk about is how to come up with those names, and I think this process is something that's often overlooked, and I'm going to share a couple examples of things — well known, I think, that are just off. I'm going to talk about how I did it. Now I'm going to start, though, with saying I'm kind of up and down with names, especially proper names.

If you watch this channel, you know that I'm really really bad at remembering names. I forget my friends names and my colleagues names, actors names, of movies, names of games, names of songs. I'm bad with names. I have, you know, some examples that I've talked about, like when we first put together the new system for Fallout, and I was like, oh good, it spells a lips, until someone came along and said: how about special? Uh, more recently, uh, when I've been doing my toy updates, I keep calling it fresnel because it looks like Fresno, and I've never heard anyone pronounce it that I can remember, and I keep getting corrected by people that saying it's frenal, that the S is silent, and I'm like, okay, and then I forget it again. I will probably misname it again. I actually found out that I probably have something called anomic Aphasia, because there is a apparently a known condition where it's very difficult for people to remember proper names.

Maybe I have it, maybe I don't, but guess what. That doesn't mean I didn't come up with a lot of proper names in my games, so I'm going to talk about that now. Fallout: I didn't do a lot of that. In fact I would probably lay the names for most things in the first Fallout on.

Scott Campbell, the original designer he named so many things. He had notes and he would draw sketches and stuff. We had junk town and the Hub and the glow. Some of these were done super, super early. My notes show these being done just a few months after we started and I have a whole video on.

How we came up for the name of Fallout — that we had a brainstorming session and we had a bunch of names and we couldn't decide and Brian Fargo came up with the name Fallout and said you guys should be Fallout. I don't think I named a single place. I'm not even sure I named an item. I might have named The Vault, but a single place name, I think until Fallout 2. I came up with the, den, which was short for the denim iniquity. I thought that was clever. I I think I came into my own in Arcanum. Arcanum is a place where I named a ton of things. I named items and spells, uh, I came up with a subtitle of Steamworks and Magic obscura. I named a lot of tarant vendor grth, The Stonewall range, the glimmering forest — those are all out of my Cranium.

I didn't do shrouded. Hills or aisle of Despair, in fact, I think, with the exception of glimmering forest, if a place was named adjective noun, I probably didn't come up with that. Not that I think that's a wrong way of doing it, I'll talk about that. It's just not how I thought about making names. I think when you come up with a name, most names are okay. Some names just really nail the vibe of the game.

And then, similarly, you can really screw up the two biggest ones I remember. I mean, I didn't even I didn't do a Google search, I just thought to myself: have you ever just stopped when you were watching a show or a movie and went, wow, that's a bad name? And I remembered two very clearly. The first one was Babylon 5. I love that TV show, love it, love it.

However, the first time they're like talking. About the shadows and that they come from the mysterious planet zaha Doom.

I literally laughed out loud and this was live television, so I couldn't pause it. And I just remember I was watching with a group and I went: that's the dumbest name ever. And somebody looked over me and went: isn't that Lord of the Rings? And I'm like yeah, it was just, it was a bad name, it didn't fit the genre, it didn't fit the tone, it was just a bad name. You know, sorry, strasinski, that was a bad name. And then, similarly, something happened when I was watching Matrix — and at this time I was watching it at home and they talked about — they all lived in the real world and an underground city named Zion, and I just paused it and I was like that is the dumbest name.

I get what it means. It's like you know, a holy place, a guarded place, a secret place, but it has so much connotation that has nothing to do with the Matrix and its world that it kind of drags all these connotations into something that has nothing to do with it, which is how I want to get into talking about how I recommend that you name things. When you're trying to think of names for a game you're making, try to think of genres like what, genre your game is? Sci-fi, fantasy, cyber, cyberpunk, you know, Atomic, postnuclear — and then think of movies, books, tabletop, roleplaying games, other video games that have names in them that you like. Think of them, write them down, Google search and write down the one ones you like and that will give you kind of a Target space, and then you can have a brainstorming session, because I love my brainstorming sessions and you can tell people. I want to come up with names like this now. I mentioned earlier I don't I'm not really a big fan of adjective noun.

They have their places. I thought shrouded Hill sounded nice in Arcanum. I think Roseway sounded nice in The Outer Worlds.

The with them is they work for anything, they work for any genre and because of that they're really generic. They're very um, if I just told you the name of one of those places, you probably couldn't guess the genre of the game, and that's why I thought zahad Doom was dumb for Babylon 5. And I think generic adjective Place — uh, adjective noun names — they're generic. It works if you're trying to fill out the map, but I wouldn't make all of your names like that. I wouldn't even make most of your names like That's just something to steer away from the.

Last recommendation I have, um, is think about how you're having people in your game talk, you know, if you've already gotten some narrative designers on and you've agreed on a, tone and sound — I don't know what the, what, the word for it is — of how people speak, you want the names to follow that. So if you're making a fantasy game and people are all like thst must go to the you know tomb of Decay and find the evil Necromancer, that's great. What you don't want to say is: thou must travel to the glowy tomb and take on the Super Rad Necromancer.

It's like what? What that's just does not belong It's wrong, so think about how people are speaking. Think about other names you've already put in that you like, names for items, names for abilities or skills or spells — and try to make sure that all of those fit in the same space, because that's something that's going to cause a kind of dissonance in your players if your names don't all come from the same space, and they should point to your genre. They should help indicate the genre. It's okay if some of them are generic, but if most of them are generic, I think you got a problem. So that's most of my recommendations, but I'm going to throw one in here. That's just personal. Can we all just give the name Kane and variations on Kane? Can we give that a break? Can we just not name things that anymore?

Because, yeah, it gets my attention, but I made a whole video about how I'm kind of over that. So thanks, and I hope this helped. You're trying to come up with names for your game.
