+++
title = "To My Fellow Game Developers"
date = "2025-08-22"
id = "wYMSdz5tonI"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life"]
summary = "I talk about how there is no perfect game, because there is no one right way to look at things. And that's ok."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk to my fellow game developers.

I know this is Friday. This is not going to be my typical fun Friday video. It's not sad, It's just a little more serious. And also I'm not talking about the game development process. What I what I want to do is talk to my fellow game developers — developers, - about kind of mindset. I don't want to talk about game development process. I don't want to give you ideas for games or tips on how to organize your design or smooth out the development process.

It's more about how you should think about things. And I can give you the short answer up front. If you don't want to watch the whole video — and that is this. I know you want to make the perfect game, but there is no perfect game. And if you want to stop there, go right ahead.

Uh, I will get into a lot more detail If you've watched all my videos, even if you've just watched some of my videos, you know I talk about how complicated the whole development process is. I talk about production and testing and design, and even the order in which you should do design, which I believe is setting story system mechanics. I talk about marketing. I talk about talking to the press. I talk about going to conventions. I talk about working with artists and working with programmers. It is complicated, and I know that can be daunting, and you should know ahead of time there are going to be things in that process, in that whole gamut of things, that you're not going to be good at. Conversely, though, there are going to be some things that you are great at that no one on the team, maybe no one at the company, is better doing than you. Both of those things are things you should think about. What? Are these things that I'm really good at? What are these things that I'm really bad at? What is it I want to do? And.

You're going to navigate the complexities of this process over your career — And I'm talking to people now, whether you've made a few games, or you're just now making your first game, or you're thinking about, you know, putting your little toe in the pool of game development. All this complexity can sound super daunting, but you will be okay, You'll be fine. But I want to give you a little bit of advice. I've hinted at it here and there in my videos, but here it is. Don't just watch my videos.

Read the comments, Read all of the comments. Most of the people who watch my videos don't read any of the comments. I'm not talking about just a few, because there are people. Who will literally post something and it's almost word for word what the person who just posted in front of them posted or an hour ago or two hours ago, or the pinned comment. And that made me realize.

Nobody's reading the comments, but I'm just telling you game developers, read the comments, because there is gold in there, Absolute gold. Just mixed in with all those rocks are some really amazing diamonds And if you can find those — and they speak to you and they're relevant to what you're working on, cherish them, because you will never get more heartfelt, direct, unfiltered feedback than a gamer talking about some topic that they really, really love. But what's more is — and I've talked about this — you're going to notice how people believe so many different things. Some people believe things that shouldn't belong in the same brain I. It's very hypocritical things like I don't like stealing, but I like that stealing, or I think things should be this way unless it's affects me, in which case it shouldn't be that way at all. But you also find people on opposite sides of a topic and they believe it passionately.

Go to my videos on encumbrance or fast travel or quest markers, and there are people on both sides who passionately believe that those features belong in a game or should never be used in a game. They don't recognize the other side or they think the other side are idiots, and they explain why they feel like what they do, and it is passionate. It is wonderful to read it, and what I'm telling you as a game developer is: use that.

Don't reject these things, Don't ignore them. You can use that passion and those beliefs for your games. You can use it to.

Make interesting worlds filled with all kinds of people and factions who help each other and oppose each other. And it can be realistic, because, guess what? You can see on my own channel all the different groups of people who passionately feel a certain way and argue with each other or sometimes just ignore each other or don't realize that they're saying something which on one video that undermines something they said on the previous one. Because, as one person said, it's human to be hypocritical.

It's okay, You're not writing a bad character if you write a character that way. Which, by the way, beyond making interesting worlds, you can make really interesting storylines with all kinds of believable characters who are arguing with each other on basic things. And you, the game developer, don't have to take a side. I think that's where people start to bristle is when they, if they, think your game is preaching to them, they will get upset. But if your game simply presents a problem, presents an issue — whether it's a social issue or a political issue, an economic issue, and there are people on both sides of it and they really feel strongly about their side — and you give them believable reasons to be on those sides, you're going to make a way better game And, of course, once you do all that world building and characters and story, now you make new mechanics that support all of that, which is the whole design process I've talked about And.

It can start right here and right now by just looking at the comments on my videos. I've said many times I read all of them and I do. There are times I don't respond. Sometimes there are whole days. I don't respond either because I'm too busy or the comments are so wildly amazing to me I don't even know where to start in a response. But I still read them and I still enjoy them, because the comments and, by extension, the commenters on these videos, are amazing.

Some people write heartfelt missives that are super long. I'm scrolling my screen to read them all. They're even saying "I don't think anyone's going to read these", Which some people do, I think, to try to get me to respond. But some people write what seem to be like a thesis on an idea. On the other hand, you have people who write pathy oneliners and then you have everything in between And it is amazing. Right there you can see all the different gamut of NPCs you can create for your world: The person who just throws one line at you and doesn't really want to engage. The person who's trying. To get you involved in whatever they care about, and everyone in between. What's interesting is — I talked in one video about um seagull managers — the ones who show up, make some comment and disrupt your entire project and then they're. They leave the room and to them it's woo, I don't have to think about that anymore.

There are people who have shown up, left one comment on one of my videos and they never come back, because YouTube Studio lets me click on someone's profile and it will tell me how many comments you've left anywhere on my channel. And there are some people who've come in, left one comment and left People have engaged with that comment. They never came back. Sometimes those comments just sit there. They're there for a year or two years now and they just sit there and the people — the person — has never come back.

That's. Interesting, too. On the other side, though, I have some people who have commented on almost every video that I've posted — if not all of them, almost all of them, and at length — and they engage with other people and they talk to them and they are trying to figure out their views and they express their own views, and my guess is, many of those people feel as much ownership of this channel as I do. And that's amazing. That's it's it I never expected that level of engagement.

And some people say things that are just completely objectively, provably wrong. They're say something about a sales figure, or we got into it on one of them. Somebody will tell me what my intent is on one of my games, and I — I've had to gently but firmly tell them "No.

That's your interpretation. My intent is this. Your interpretation is this: Neither of us are wrong". And it's interesting because when they say something that completely conflicts with something you believe, a lot of people want to argue. Get in there and argue it out. I think it's.

You can do something much better than that As a game developer. You can try to understand why they feel that way. You don't have to agree with them, You don't have to defend them, but you really should try to understand why they feel that way, and not necessarily so your next game won't have the feature they hate or the kind of characters they hate, but so you can understand where this passion is coming from and you can put that into your game, as maybe some NPCs that disagree with the main character or disagree with a big faction in the group, and they are believably disagreeing with them because you've seen that level of passion right here and I think that is absolutely wonderful. So for me to circle back, because, uh, I've been talking too long, I know you want to make the perfect game and I just I started this by saying there is no perfect game, but there is the perfect game for you. Find that perfect game and make it, That'll be your perfect game, Good luck.
