+++
title = "Game Development Caution, Part 2"
date = "2023-11-03"
id = "X9ejDUuu7Sc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Development"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to do part two of game development caution, because that video got a lot of views and a lot of comments and I kind of want to talk about it."
references = ["LMVQ30c7TcA"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to do part two of game development caution, because that video got a lot of views and a lot of comments and I kind of want to talk about it.

Yeah, I know the lighting's weird. It is just dark in Seattle all the time. Sometimes today's a dark day, so I just turned on the overhead light.

See how this goes, so I did video on game developer caution — game development caution — and on the one hand, there was a lot of really good discussion about it and that was great. I loved that there was discussion, because that's kind of what the game development business needs. It needs people talking about things, talking about processes, talking about problems, just telling people. This is what it's like, so you can make an informed decision if this is the job you want to do.

But there was a problem that ran through the comments on that video, and some of the places that picked up the video continued: what? I considered to be an issue with how that video was taken, and the problem was that they were focusing on individuals. People were listening to the stories I told and focusing on one of the individuals as the problem, and not what the problem was I was trying to illustrate. I mean, I can give you an example.

There were a lot of people that said I was the bad guy, that I was the obvious bad boss, that I wasn't listening to the people who were working for me, I wasn't accepting their estimates, I was yelling in my office — it's funny, I know. I kind of said we were yelling, we were just having a discussion, um, and it bothered me when I found out, oh, people are bother, I'll shut the door, we'll go do it somewhere else. But the point of that was more of a people don't want to.

Talk about issues in detail like that. They just — most of them — just want to be told what to do. Um, that's kind of the point. I wasn't saying that these people are bad. I'm saying the process that they find themselves involved in is bad.

Um, a lot of people were like: oh, you should have just fired some of those people involved. They didn't want the Whiteboard up fired, gave you bad estimates, fire them. That's totally missing the whole point of the video.

Um, and I'm torn because I think when I'm talking about things I do better. When I give specific examples, it illustrates it and kind of roots it in reality. And these are real problems that happen. These are real things that happen, but the problem is people when they focus on the wrong thing. It makes me think that they're like a doctor who, rather than trying to find out the cause of your illness, you're just being given pills to treat the symptoms. So it's like: oh, I've got this pain in my side, here's a painkiller.

That's not what I wanted. I want to know why I have a pain in my side. I don't want a painkiller. Um, although, when I had the kidney stone, right as soon as I found out it was a kidney stone, I wanted all the painkillers they could give me I I was like: get science in the room. I need more painkillers, but similarly saying: well, Tim, you're a horrible boss, no one will ever want to work with you. I agree, there's people who don't want to work with me and probably some people on this channel who wouldn't want to work with me and I wouldn't want to work with them. A lot of people do. That's missing the point. It's there, was a problem getting people involved in a way that I think is part of their job, that they should be thinking: I'm putting this feature in.

Is this going to connect right? Um, why do people? Why, are we even needed this? No, nobody asked me why we needed that AI. I suggested it was needed because designers were blocked on testing, combat. They suggest. I added I thought was reasonable 45 minutes of code connected in just two spots, two locations, through events, an event system that already existed.

No unit tests. No, how would this be extended? This code was designed to be thrown out. It served a purpose, it I could do a whole thing on rapid prototyping, and maybe I will, but rapid prototyping just isn't a thing in the industry anymore and it was hard to get people to understand. I'm just trying to unblock something here really quickly. You will still be scheduled to do the real AI when it's really going to go in a few more months. We just need the designers and level designers especially who are making encounters, to be able to get a little better feel for how those encounters will go. But anyway, let's talk about a non-game example. Maybe if I Illustrated this with a non-game example it would make more sense.

Let's say there was an intersection near your house. Two streets intersected, and there are always accidents There cars are always running into each other there. Now a reasonable person might go okay, are there trees or Hedges or other things blocking view there? Maybe we need stop signs or stoplight or maybe we need to replace it with roundabout. Those are reasonable discussions to the problem I just mentioned people asking questions about what's what could be the cause of this, and here are some possible solutions. Instead, how I see people talk about it is: oh my goodness, they should ticket everybody who has an accident there and if you have more than one accident, you just get your license removed. That'll fix it, or they say: why don't we just reduce the speed on those roads and all the nearby roads to like 10 miles per hour? Then there probably won't be accidents because people can stop in time. And even if there are, no one will get hurt or they go.

There's an accidents there and people are getting hurt a lot. We should build a Hospital right on the corner so then when people get hurt we can take them right into that hospital and it's like those, all those suggestions. People think they're being reasonable and intelligent and this is I'm going to fix this problem of accidents at this intersection. But they're looking at the wrong thing. They're either punishing the people for having the accidents or making it so that the accident still happen, but the side effects aren't, as bad, either in damage, or the accidents happened just as badly, but you've got something there to fix the people. It breaks my programmer brain that people think those are suggestions, reasonable suggestions to there's an intersection with a lot of accidents. And that's how I feel like a lot of people are responding to my stories. They're not thinking about what's causing it, they're looking at the symptoms and going. I can get rid of those symptoms: trivial and to put it in another noname, development analogy.

Let me tell you what I, what, how I think of this channel, this whole Channel, every topic, every time I I start and talk, this is what I'm thinking. I feel like I'm walking around a dark warehouse and I've got a flashlight and I'm pointing at things in the warehouse and I'm going: oh, look there, that's a see those boxes. I want people to see them, I want to be aware of what it is they're seeing and then, if it's an issue, maybe they can have some ideas of how to fix it. Now good suggestions would be: hey, I didn't get a good perspective on those boxes. Can you stand in a different place and illuminate them? Perfectly reasonable answer, or hey, I have some ideas of where you should go in the warehouse, some places that need the light shown so we can talk about that thing — perfectly reasonable suggestions.

Instead, I get comments like: well, I get that. Oh, you're stupid. I get that in worded in many different ways. Or buy a bigger flashlight you loser, which I don't get why, anybody would say that. Or we just turn off the flashlight.

Now where's? There's no problems anymore? Um, people have basically suggested things of, rather than fixing the problem, they're making the problem not visible anymore. And then some people even go: well, you should just leave the warehouse, you should go to the Indie Warehouse next door. We don't have those problems, and I'm like: okay, but can you not see that there's still a big Warehouse with people bumping around in the dark and having problems? Going to the new Warehouse doesn't fix the old Warehouse. Um, I understand some of you are like: look, I didn't build this Warehouse. I don't know how to fix the warehouse problems. I'm going to go over to the Indie Warehouse. I get it, but you know I spent the last 40 years in that warehouse.

I want to try to help fix some of these things or, even better, point out them so you guys can fix them. Um, so, in a sense, I kind of want the issues discussed so that people know what the issues are and agree with the issues are and then try to fix them. And that's the whole point of this kind of you know, I want — in addition to me wanting you guys to go and make great games for me to play, which is a totally selfish reason — but I consider this channel a place for learning about G game development topics and discussing them, and some topics include problems that exist in the game industry. What I'm hoping is that people will focus more on treating the causes of those problems and a lot less on just ameliorating the symptoms of those problems. And, as I said in another video about hey, we've all got to agree that there is a problem and what's the cause of the problem and then the solution of the problem.

That's kind of what I'm saying here. I see a lot of discussion about game development caution. I don't see a lot of a lot of suggestions on how to get rid of it I see a lot of people saying I don't think it's a problem or they're being this way because of fear of their job or fear of speaking out. Okay, if that's the root cause of this, how do we fix that? And I don't think we fix that by firing people, because once you start going down that road, you end up with a lot of very quiet people who never want to rock the boat again. I still see game development caution as being a problem. I don't see it being solved with some of the solutions people are saying. In fact, most of those ignore the cause and are just going after symptoms. I think in the future let's look more at causes, and that's kind of what this video is about. Anyway, thank you.
