+++
title = "Using Combat Skills Outside Of Combat"
date = "2025-09-17"
id = "X_bbscwVvzc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems", "Combat Design"]
summary = "I talk about how combat skills can be made to have utility outside of combat. This is a companion piece to the previous video on non combat skill usage in combat, linked below."
references = ["MhhjmTGnwEg", "xAbrZtmDQfM"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about using combat skills outside of combat.

This video can be seen as a companion piece to yesterday's video about using non-combat skills in combat. And I'm filming this the day after the previous video, but the previous video is probably one you watched two days ago. I'll link it below And I also want to remind you guys, it's still June for me, so I haven't seen your comments on that video. I thought I'd make this video before I saw your comments, so we can kind of compare our ideas on, in this case, usage making, utility for combat skills outside of combat. So you may want to watch the other one first. In any case, I'll also start off by saying this has been done before. I know Fallout did it, I know The Outer Worlds did it.

There were some dialogue lines that had as a prerequisite a combat skill. So in a sense already I've seen melee and unarmed and I think even guns used as a dialogue prerequisite. So that's a way the combat skill is being used outside of combat. However, it could a lot more, could be done a lot more. And I will go over some ideas of how you can make combat skills useful outside of combat. The question probably here should be why you should do that. Do combat skills really need to be used outside of combat?

I mean, they already have so much utility in the game. Do we need to make combat skills even more useful and give the player more reason to buy them? I've already done a video, and I'll link this one below, on how violence seems to be the default action that is expected in most AAA RPGs. Yeah, you can talk to people and sneak around and steal things, but mostly you're expected to attack enemies. So I was thinking here that maybe, just maybe, if combat skills had more utility outside of combat, that might encourage some players to try the non-combat solutions. Thinking well, I spent points on these combat skills, but hey, I can use them outside of combat too. They have utility, maybe I should do that instead. And they always know they can fall back on just combat if they wanted. So let's run down some ideas I had of how to use combat skills outside of combat. One thing that could be used in dialogue more than I think has been done before is ways to modify the player being intimidating. And if you're like The Outer Worlds and you have an intimid intimidation skill, you can use it with that. But I think this would work for any game that has any speech skills. Even if the entire entirety of your game's dialogue skill is collapsed to one skill called speech — Um.

You could use. That skill and combine it with combat skills to make lines that are tailored to reflect that that skill is being used and is only available if someone has both of those skills at a minimum level, or maybe their sum has to be a certain level. So, for example, speech and guns. You could have somebody be set upon by bandits and they basically, you know, pop up at a bridge and go: "Give us your money or you can't go across". I could see a speech and guns line from a, from a player, being: "Look, I don't want to have to put a bullet in everyone here, Just let me cross this bridge". And if your speech and guns, if both of them are non zero, and maybe their sum is above a certain value, or maybe each one of them individually is above a certain value, that line succeeds and the bandits are like we're back off.

Similarly, I could see you going to talk to some important NPC and having a bodyguard stop you and go: "Yeah, he's not seeing anybody". I could see you having a speech and unarmed combination and say, "Hey, unless you me want you, unless you want me to knock you unconscious right here and now, you tell your boss I'm here to see him". That could be really fun. It could be a great way of making your character more intimidating, because he's got really high combat skills. And also pointing out: here are the combat skills I'm using. Players love it when a skill they put points in actively gets used, not just passively.

Anyway, I also see that you could do bonuses to traps. And by that I don't mean disarming them, I mean setting them A lot of games. Let you set up traps, It's a great. Way, if you know you're going to fight somebody, you can set up traps beforehand. Maybe some games even let you drop tap traps in the middle of combat.

This is cool. I think it would be nice if the traps used combat skills, if the materials or the traps in some way were related to the combat skill. So if you have an explosive skill, you can set exploding traps and they do more damage than just the person who set it off. Maybe the enemy and all the enemies around them take damage. If you have a high shotgun skill, you can trigger a shotgun to go off when enemies cross a line or enter a room or something like that, Just giving you extra damage to start off with Things like this. Also, players love it when they get to kind of tilt combat in their favor. It's sort of like a stealth attack, but this is using completely different sets of skills to get that bonus when combat starts. Another way: I think it'd be really cool for the player to have combat skills used, I want to say, outside of combat. This isn't quite outside of combat, but what if the player putting points in their combat skills added — excuse me, I've got horrible allergies today. What if the player putting skills in their combat skills once it went past 100, like you can do in a lot of games like Fallout — those extra points go into all of your companions associated skills, similar skills. So like, if your gun skill is 110, your companions all get plus 10 to their gun skills. And what's cool about this is, while it's still making your combat skills useful in combat, it's doing it through your companions, which I'm going to say.

Is a — not maybe is a loophole. You're not better in combat, but your game goes better because your you being good in combat makes your companions better. So just threw that out, there is — I know it's still inside combat, but it's outside the player being in combat. Anyway, I can think of a ton of perks that could be made to operate through the player's combat skills. For example, if you have a perk, if you have a healing skill, maybe there's a perk that says if you're healing wounds caused by a weapon that you're skilled in, you get a bonus on healing that wound. Maybe you heal more damage, maybe the healing is faster if it's over time, whatever. So if someone gets sliced by a sword and you have a high sword skill bonus healing, Someone gets impaled by a spear, you have a high spear skill bonus healing.

That could. Be really, really fun, Especially if you go up against an enemy and you're like: hm, they're using spears and I really know spears. Well, I will attack them and I know I'll be able to heal the damage quickly afterwards. And then similar to that, maybe if you get a com uh, like some of your defensive combat skills, like shield, really high, maybe that can be used to take reduced damage, not just inside combat but also reduce damage from, say, traps. So a trap goes off. You have a really high shield skill and you have a shield equipped, you take less damage. That would be really cool because you've spent all your points in combat. You probably don't have points in detecting or disarming traps.

That's great. I also thought that there could be more synergy between basic player attributes and skills. I know this is kind of weird, because usually attributes are used to form the basis of skills so that you know if you have a high, you know decks, you have a high dodge. But I think in specific cases it could be cool to add an additional synergy on particular kind of checks. For example, if you're checking against dexterity because you are doing wall climbing, if the player has a high unarmed combat skill, you could say that adds a bonus for specifically using dex checks for wall climbing, because the player obviously has good hand coordination and strength. Doesn't have to be a huge bonus, but just seeing that in there would make the player go: "Oh, that's a good reason to put points in unarmed". Or if the player gets thrown in jail and there's an opportunity to bend the bars to try to escape, maybe if you have a high lockpicking skill, it can say "Well, you. Managed to bend the bars of this jail cell because you did it right near the lock which popped it open".

If you're thinking this would be a pain to do, I can already imagine a way of doing this systemically, so that in the, map tool or the level editor — whatever your level designers are using to put in — there's a UI that pops up. So when there's a lock that can be picked and it says: you know, uses lockpicking at this bonus or penalty, there can also be pulld downs going. You can also do a strength check which is modified by lockpicking in this way. So that way, uh, there could be something already put in for level designers to make sure that that kind of synergy is used frequently enough. Something else I was thinking was crafting. Crafting is something that almost always uses just its own skills. So you have skills to harvest materials and then skills to make mods and ammo and food or whatever. What if, whenever you made ammo or mods for particular weapons, you got some kind of bonus if your skill in that weapon was higher? If you're making ammo, maybe you make more ammo. You're making a mod, maybe that mod has a bonus because it's a slightly better mod, because you are so good at using that weapon that you know you know more about how to improve it. Or you know you've shot it so many times that you know exactly how much gunpowder to pack in, and maybe you can pack in a little less or use a slightly bigger shot in it and you just get the same amount of damage. You also might want to consider making some recipes gated by skill.

So here's a really good mod for a pistol. But you need a pistol skill. Not only does your crafting — how to be — have to be good, but your pistol skill has to be good too. You don't understand enough about pistols to know how to make a mod that's good for pistols. So I think that would work and it would make a lot of sense and it would also make people craft differently depending on what kind of character they made. So somebody who's oriented with medical or speech would probably be crafting different things because their recipes would be gated or bonused, or however you want to do that through different skills.

I think I think that's enough. Let me just tell you a quick conclusion here. I think any non-combat use of a combat skill is good in the sense it will make the player feel like the purchase of that combat skill was worth it, even if it then leads to them getting into combat less rarely or more rarely — which all the talk I hear about RPGs making players into murder hobos, the idea of them spending points in a combat skill and then doing less combat because there are more solutions to getting around you know a or doing a quest without using combat, That seems like a win to me and it certainly seems like something that, uh, people should dive into. Anyway, I hope this was an interesting video.
