+++
title = "Violence As The Default In AAA RPGs"
date = "2025-01-01"
id = "xAbrZtmDQfM"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["RPG Design", "Combat Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about violence as the as the default in AAA RPGs."
references = []
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. And today I want to talk about violence as the as the default in AAA RPGs.

It's a very specific title because I mean all of this. I'm talking about violence. I'm talking about games that have violence as the default thing. That's what they expect you to do, and I'm only talking about AAA RPGs because this came from a very good, thoughtful and well-written question by saber vs7, who asked: hi, Tim, I'm curious as to if you think games, while practically speaking, the RPG genre, specifically at the mainstream budget level — I know there's plenty of Indies who are trying to be the change you want to see in this regard — will be able to evolve past the Paradigm of violence being the default way in which the player interacts with the world. Just so you know. This went on for a long time.

His question because he wanted to clarify it and make sure I knew what he was asking and I appreciate that. I'm just not going to read the whole thing. I actually had originally written a response to his question but then I realized I deleted it and like this really needs a video. It needs a longer response, somewhat nuanced and very specific, and I want to keep repeating that because I'm talking about violence being, you know, combat.

I'm talking about whether or not games treated as the default, because a lot of games have it, but they don't expect you to do it, and we're talking about AAA RPGs, like big budget RPGs. We're not talking about Indies. We're not talking about solo devs, also, I realized my anwers some people aren't going to like because I've gotten pushback on similar answers in the past, but let's see what happens if you don't feel like watching this. The tldw is: companies make games and, in general, products that people will buy there. That's it means games that sell the most. And I'm not even talking about review the best, just sell the most will dictate future games. This is obvious, if you have a company and it's trying to make money and there's one game, uh type, that sells millions of copies and another one that sells 100,000, which one are you going to do if they both take just as much time and money to develop?

Kind of obvious, but as a side note, this is why I always tell people: vote with your dollars. And I know people always come back and go: hey, I can't, do that. Then they list a bunch of reasons like it won't matter anyway, or I don't have a choice, or you know, sometimes you're, in an environment where the only thing available to buy is this thing. That's not that good, I get it, I get it I will say this, though, if you think, you're just a drop in the bucket, if enough people do this, those drops become a storm and companies will listen. There are products and stores and entire companies that I will not buy from. I don't think they care or even notice, but I do, and it's just one of those things that just it's just one of those things that you have to draw the line somewhere and everybody draws it in a different spot, and I get it. You have a different financial situation or you have a different situation about you know where you actually live and what is available to you. I get it, but to not draw a line because you think it won't matter is a way to guarantee it won't matter. It's like when people say I don't vote because my one vote won't matter. If once enough people think that way, it matters. So let's go back, and talk about the question.

Action genres tend to sell very well. So by that I mean action RPGs, kind of out sell classic RPGs, even though both of them have violence. Action RPGs are more paced to constantly doing, not turn-based combat, no pauses, no stop to read something, less dialogues, walls of text, things like that. But by many people action means violence. The thing you're doing is shooting creatures, shooting people, you know, attacking them, that kind of stuff, because it's what people seem to want. This translates into sales. It's also easier to Market those kind of games. When you watch a trailer and you see people actually doing things — jumping, climbing, shooting, punching — it looks like whoa that.

Look at, look at all things you can do in that game. Leonard barsky and I have had really good laughs over the years when we've tried to Market our games and we wanted to point out: hey, you can do a lot more than just combat in here, because it's hard to show the other things. When we were putting together the The Outer Worlds's marketing, we had big discussions with the marketing people and the external trailer people that we hired. How do we show that this game has a really good story? How do we show that it has fantastic dialogue?

How do you do that in a trailer that may only be 15 or 30 seconds long? I mean, you have to reduce this wonderful narrative that's, super creative and nuanced, that has a huge Arc, down to a sound bite and guess what it's? Because most people won't watch more than a few seconds of something, 15. I mean. We didn't used to have 15-second commercials when I was a kid. They were always a minute, then it got reduced to 30 seconds. Now they're 15 seconds Um, I've seen some stuff done now in YouTube channels, the ones where people Hawk stuff, where the internal Hawking — now I'm not talking when it cuts to a YouTube ad, they just mention it really quick, like: oh and by the way, if you want to see a quiz, go to blah blah site, and they just do it real fast because if they talk any longer people will skip.

So it's like this, because this is how people, react to it. You may not like it, you may try to deny it, but enough people react to this thing that companies have to look at this and go: this is what people react to. I won't say they want it, but they. This is what people buy, this is what PE, this is what keeps people attention focused. So this is what they do.

Proof of this is there are lots of games out there that either have no violence at all or there's no violence that the player can do. Look, I mean, there are so many puzzle games, C games, their adventure games, you know way back. The seventh guest and Mist to the witness or life is strange. That doesn't don't really have, you know, combat built into them. It's basically you walk around, you look at things, you talk to people, you figure things out. Those sell well enough obviously to keep making them. But action games, far out sell those things. And I know there's occasional exceptions, you know, like farming and gardening and plot-based games. Not plot, it's a narrative, plot is in you grow stuff, farming games. But those exceptions kind of prove the rule because if you look at like the steam top 50 or top 100, you see an awful lot of action. Violent oriented games.

They're not making. The companies don't make them because they feel like it. They make them because they sell.

What I've always tried to push back on, that is theyve always, been RPGs that you don't need to do violence. So I've always touted my RPGs as not only not needing violence, not needing you to make a combat character, but I don't even tout that one as the default path. I don't consider combat the main path and stealth and dialogue as the Alternatives. I always said this game supports multiple paths.

You want to talk your way through it, knock yourself out. You want to stealth your way through it, go for it. Even when there's like combat, that has to be done. Usually your companions can do it, or you can use stealth or dialogue to avoid it or reduce it so low that it becomes a relatively trivial fight. Combine that the fact that there are easy modes and now even things called story modes that vastly reduce the violence.

There are options there, but people don't take them as much. People play the non-story modes more often than story modes. I know there are people who love story mode and that's great and that's why we put them in there, but more people don't play it in the non-story mode.

Here's a funny story and I don't know if I've mentioned this, but when we were developing Fallout there was someone who was playing through it, just shooting every NPC they encountered before they could even talk. And you know, I kind of knew there were people were going to do this, but it turns out he broke the game and he broke it with Gizmo in junk toown. He walked into that room and just shot Gizmo right in the head. Before he could say a word and that broke the game. It literally broke the main story progression.

This shocked me because I didn't think that was possible and we looked into It's because he gave you something that wasn't in his inventory. It was an item and it was created by the script that transferred it. So we had to change the design to make sure you could still get that thing even if he was dead. And then I had the designers comb through the entire game looking for things like that, where shooting an NPC before they could even talk to you, if that was possible. There were a few that could talk to you automatically, like the um, the overseer, and I think we made the overseer essential until the end of the game. But we made sure we made sure it was not possible to break the main storyline.

With violence, dialogue or stealth, because I wanted every character build to be able to make it through to the end. Which was really important for my game and I thought it was that it was violence that broke it. You would think violence was the default Fallout, but it really wasn't. People frequently made quests and thought this isn't what the player's going to do. Violence is not going to be the go-to in this one. But guess what?

Combing through Fallout while we were dealing with crash bugs and all the other things. We were dealing with that, the game that was making the game late in shipping. That took time and money, so, yeah, we're back to that old Bugaboo: time and money.

That's the main reason. It's my main answer for a lot of these things.

Companies make games that people will buy, so they try to make games. That people will buy a lot so that the investment into the game gets returned more, so they can have some of the money and go. We look at the money — we're going to sleep on a bed of money, but also to reinvest in future games to make more games.

If people rarely chose nonviolence in triaa games, then because they rarely choose the nonviolence game. GES like that don't sell as much and so they probably won't be made again.

It's that simple. It's a chain. It's a deductive chain.

I like rarely chosen paths. I put dumb dialogue in a lot of my games. I like to support generalists or really bizarre Specialists, and these are supported in my games.

In fact, I played the first lwi in full playthrough and Fallout. The character's name was potato and I finished the game with potato and proved that a one intelligence character could finish. That game, and it was hard because he didn't get very many skill points. His skill points and Fallout depended on your intelligence. In Arcanum I played a non-mage, non-tech person, it was just a swordsman. It was just a guy with a sword.

I didn't buy any spells and I didn't buy any of the tech um schematics or the tech skills I didn't. I tried to keep my uh Magic Tech meter on zero. That was a hard playthrough, because lots of things were enticing me to do something else. In Temple of Elemental Evil, I've mentioned that I played an all halfling, all bar party. All the player characters were halfling bars and I didn't bring on any companions. It was a difficult, playr, but I did it and in fact that's why it was later when, the game shipped, we found out that there was a major crash bug involving bars, I was shocked. I never saw it turns out it has to do with keeping your Bard songs Running when you switched maps, and I always shut mine down afterwards.

But anyway, a lot of games remove these less common paths and they see little to no reduction in sales, meaning there weren't enough of you who liked those paths and — and this is the important part — and based your purchase of the game on those paths being there. Some of you may want it, but you still buy games that don't have it. So all they know is we can develop this game for less money and faster and have less to test if we get rid of these less common paths. But deliberately deleting a common path, that often does lead to Less sales. So that's why they're there and you have to think about this, because if you're risking someone, else's money — which in AAA RPGs you are, because I hear people already going — well, Indies don't do this and self pubs don't do it — op asked about AAA RPGs — things that have budgets of 100 million and Are Climbing — you got to think about. You're risking someone else's money and you want to work again after this. So if you put out a game that doesn't sell well, that's horrible for the company, but it's not exactly something that makes your resume look good, and so everybody want a game. It sells well, but you want it to be good, you want it to be reflective of your POV and all that. But the bottom line is violence currently sells well. It's sold well for a long time and way outside of games — violent movies, TV shows, books — they sell well. So companies will continue to make violent games. I hope that answers your question saber vs7.
