+++
title = "Games And Theater"
date = "2025-03-21"
id = "XALrVhS-Idg"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Industry"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about video games and the theater."
references = ["wEIOUsAB-xU", "wVFSCsv0GqY"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about video games and the theater.

This may sound like a weird thing, but I got a bunch of stories to tell. It'll make sense and there's even some stuff we can learn from it. But let's just take a look at the video game business and theater business and look at how, at the very top, they're very similar. Both are groups of people which are a mix of creatives — you know whether it's designers and you know artists, vers versus. You know actors and set designers and a lot of technical people, whether it's programmers or people who do lighting or people who just know how to manage, uh, stage business. Both groups require a lot of discipline and are really helped if they have a good director.

So right then, you can see. Okay, there's some similarities. Let me put a caveat on this. I am not a theater kid. I have never done theater, except for some narrations I did in elementary school, but I've heard comparisons made to the video game industry and theater a lot over the last several decades, so I finally decided to dive into it I was, and I actually was writing this when I heard someone at work mention something about this, which I add it in below and I'll talk about. But let me talk about how this whole thing got started. I was reading something about how the theater business was booming. This was pre-co. It was booming and yet 80% of theater Productions were failing.

There's a link below. Does this sound familiar? This sounds like the game industry where how can it be doing so well, yet there are so many things that are coming out that aren't considered very good.

Now did a video about how hard it is to make an IP in a new medium, and that's also linked below, and a friend had seen it. A friend who's in the industry had seen that video and said: hey, I don't know if you know this, but the theater, especially musical theater, is the one area where adaptation rules Supreme. And I went: what? So he sent me to a site which I'll link below: kend davenport, which said the following things, and this is data over the past 30 years, although this particular place — I believe this was this — is 10 or 15 years ago, so it was 30 years ago, a decade ago. But over the previous 30 years, from that article, 82% of the new musicals on Broadway were adaptations from other mediums. They were either from books or movies or something else.

Only 18% were a original musicals. The average run of the adaptations were 644 per performances. The average run of The Originals were only 331 performances, meaning they only did half. As well as the adaptations of the original musicals produced in the last 30 years, 30% of them were open for less than a month, so they did a lot less than 331 performance es. In fact, Seven original musicals closed in their first week. So it's just tough, and — and as if that wasn't enough data, he went on to say that 83% of all of the best musical Tony Award winners in the past 30 years were adaptations. So clearly, adaptations are something that musical theater does really well. So it's not the case in that uh medium that adapting something from another uh medium is a tough thing to do.

In fact, it seems to work really really well for them. So it made me go: well, maybe games could learn how to do ad adaptations from the theater. Well, this led me to something else that someone from work had mentioned. It turns out that there was a study done uh at Northwestern a few years ago that basically was studying how team composition, specifically speically the experience of the team members, corresponded to a successful collaboration. It was called team assembly mechanisms determine collaboration, Network structure and team performance.

That's so academic. It was by Roger gima and others. I will link it below. You can go right to the PDF and read it yourself.

But anyway they studied team composition in two disperate areas: in Broadway musicals and scientific p ERS. For the Broadway musicals they studied all 2,258 Productions in the period of 1877 all the way up to 1990. For the scientific writing collaborations they looked at all the Publications in several different fields. They looked at seven social ecology journals, nine economics journals, 10 ecology journals and six astronomy journals. So widely different scientific disciplines with no overlap in the Personnel.

What they found — and I thought this was really, really interesting, and this is academic, so in other words, there's it's full of graphs and sigma values — and success was most correlated to having a mix of newcomers and veterans in the production, whether it was a musical theater piece or a scientific journal. What they found was teams of all newcomers. Newcomers tended to fail. That wasn't surprising. What was surprising is that teams of all veterans didn't do much better. They did better than all newcomers, but they didn't do as well as things that had a mix, and the mix was different depending on the different groups. You can go read the paper and get the exact percentage values yourself, but what they basically found was having a team of people who had experience and then adding some newcomers in to that almost always improved the success chances of the resulting work. The new people tended to add more energy, new viewpoints, new ideas. Now, this is something that struck me as very interesting because when I did Fallout, we were viewed as a new team and I — I mentioned this in another video — people always viewed me as the new guy, even though by the time I started in Fallout — making Fallout — I'd been in the industry for 13 years. So when there was somebody at interplay said, I can't believe you got to be a producer so got to, you got to be a producer so quickly.

And I'm like 13 years is a long time. You, or is you think that's not a long time? I've been doing this for 13 years. I I think being able to run my own project should have eventually come along. So I was kind of the old guy and a lot of people who worked there because they were in their, you know, some of them were in their late teens, but most of them were in their early 20s and I was already. By the time we started on Fallout, I was already 28. I was an old guy, so you could view that, as there was me, the old guy with a few games behind me, and a few other people that had one or two games behind them, and then a lot of new people, this was like one of their first things they would ever were ever working on. That was an interesting mix. I didn't realize it then. It was complete accident, but that was great. So that was something that I thought was cool. And again, it's something that, hey, if it works in musical theater, maybe that's something else the game industry can and should learn about. And then there's one other thing towards the end of outer: worlds, which took us three, and a half years to make — although the first 6 months it was just Leonard and I, so let's say three years — somebody who was new to the project and was their very first game ever.

He came to me and he said: hey, I know we're about to ship. Why do I feel sad? And I'm like, oh, that's normal to me. I said, oh, that was totally normal. You always feel a little unhappy when a project ships. I discovered that there's something known in theater.

It's called post — production depression or the post show Blues. This is a period of sadness at the end of a long project. It's where that people have studied It's where you feel lost. You feel unsure of what to do next. You're worried about your career.

Arc, what is this particular show or game going to do for my career? Or even is it going to? Is there going to be unemployment? If it does badly is, am I going to get laid off?

I mentioned this at a team meeting because that newcomer had brought it up and a lot of people were like, no, that's, you're dumb, that's not a thing. I don't know why people were so pushing back on this um, but it was um. It's even been compared, at least by one psychiatrist, to postpartum depression, and that psychiatrist even said: at least with postpartum depression you still have the baby. Where for postow blues, the thing you worked on so hard is gone. It's now gone and out of your control and you don't get to be with it anymore.

So that's something else that I thought. Huh, if these Studies have been done for the theater, I wonder if they should be done for the game.

Industry as well, because that's something else they have in common. You work for years on a game, in the game ships, and then you kind of feel sad or a lost, unstuck. You just don't know what to do with yourself.

I get that, I totally get that. So anyway, I thought that was some really good lessons from theater, namely, they're really good at making adaptations, they've learned to have a mix of new and experienced people and after, the show, you get a little sad. And it's been studied, so anyway, there's a bunch of links and references in the description if you want to follow up on any of this. I just thought it was a really interesting thing to realize how much overlap there was between the video game business and the theater business.
