+++
title = "Learning Design From Travel"
date = "2025-02-14"
id = "XMiEXuFzNYU"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Design"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about learning design from travel."
references = ["Kh5JMp5_5nQ", "OGwAez5SNd0", "4WlWKSlAyrg", "lJmayo1zZbk", "lM3tSFuB4eM", "uuO1t-D2MuM", "kIYa7NjTMxY", "6Nu6okKdL2M"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about learning design from travel.

May seem weird that I'm saying I learned game design lessons from traveling around the world, but I did, and this is one of a series of videos I've slid in to the channel. I've talked about learning design from failure, from board games, from Christmas gift exchanges, from sitcoms, from collecting fragrances, from other non-game disciplines, even lessons I learned from a bad teacher. Basically, what you should walk away from is you can learn game design from just about anything. So don't restrict yourself like I did for years, because, let me tell you, I used to be a bad traveler, or, more specifically, I used to think that I hated traveling. Part of this, I think, came from my family, and not deliberately. My family went everywhere by car. We, every Easter, we went to Ohio to spend with my aunt. We took a couple trips to Disney World, which, if you don't know, Orlando, is about 12 hours by car from Washington DC. I grew up right outside DC. That is a long trip, especially for loading a bunch of kids into a station wagon, and especially if you and some of the other kids get car sick. It was just not pleasant for me to the point where I actually said I didn't want to go to Disney World the second time because I just didn't want to go through that, and I basically was. I went against my will.

The other problem, though, is I traveled with family and also other people who did one of two extremes when they traveled: they either planned every single second of what you were going to do — we're going to get up, we're going to do this and we're do this, we're going to do this and we're going to eat lunch, or we eat breakfast, and then we're going to do this, we're going to take photographs. Here, and then we're going to have lunch, and then we're going to do this and to do this. We're going to do this and then we're going to have dinner here, but if we can't get in there, we're going to eat here and then we're going to do this and this for night, and then we're going to have to be in bed by 9:00, because the next morning we're getting up at 5:00 am so we can drive here.

And it was a crazy way of taking a relaxing vacation, or the flip side is here, we are all done. It's like fine things to do at this new location.

I didn't even fly until I was 21 years old. I considered then, and still consider now, flying to be a luxury, and I've gotten push back on this channel about that. People said nope, flying is not a luxury. Sometimes you have to fly for a, work interview, or you have to fly because you know a relative is sick or has died. I'm literally telling you, in my younger days I didn't fly for all of those reasons. I couldn't afford to travel to do a work interview if they weren't going to pay for it, which back then I don't think anybody did. I wasn't, especially not a junior person. I had to not visit sick relatives. I had to miss a funeral once because I literally couldn't afford it I couldn't even put it on my credit card, because back then credit cards — for you know, when you in your early 20s, my credit card, I think, had a $500 limit and I was already at it because I had put food on it, because I had so little money, I was using my credit card to buy food to live. So to me, air travel was a luxury and I didn't like car travel, so I just didn't travel. Then in my 30s I started dating someone who loved traveling and he knew all the tricks. He got miles from his credit card, he would upgrade his ticket from economy into business and sometimes first class, and sometimes my ticket too. We would use lounges at the airport.

Uh, he bought me really good luggage so I wasn't carting this heavy suitcase with no wheels, which I was doing up until the time I met him. He also taught me how to stay in different hotels, like we would often go someplace and we'd stay in different hotels even when we were in the same city, just to get a feel for what the different hotels were like and what different parts of the city were like. We did that in Paris and it was amazing: the different Aon. D small felt different when you stayed there. And then we went to the south of France. We went to L and sarla and stayed in hotels down there and then came back and we took a train and I was like my mind was like poof when Tempo development to evil. When the PE, when the person who was going to go do the Press event for that couldn't go because he didn't have a passport, he convinced me to go and I had a great time. We went. In addition to France, we Al also went to South Korea. I went to South Korea with him before I ever worked for ncys soft and it was amazing. It was so cool to see these different cultures and to meet different people and to see all kinds of things. Afterwards I was way more of a traveler and when I was at obsidian I went to a conference in Australia. Twice I went to a conference in Croatia.

It was awesome. It was neat to see these places and let me just tell you some of the things I learned by going to other countries. My overall goal, My overall thing I learned, was: other countries are very different and also the same, sure the. I especially love all the different food. I'm a foodie. I love eating all the different foods.

I was very adventurous. I ate some things. I ate a raw crab in South Korea. It was delicious. I was assured that the vinegar killed any parasites and I'm fine, it was absolutely. I ate a 1,000 year old egg which is totally black and it's not a thousand years old, but it's very unusual looking and an unusual acquired taste. I'm not sure I'd try it again.

I've eaten NATO for anyone from. Japan or like Japanese food, I would not eat it again, but like veite, I understand it's an acquired taste. I've also tried veite — vegemite's.

Okay, I don't think I'd ever go. I'm jonesing for some veite, but one thing I learned was there are so many different Customs that you have to learn restaurants how they seat people. Whether you tip in some countries where you want to, where you have to go just to buy an over-the-counter drug like ibuprofen or um Ceda minin, which is called something totally different in Europe, and you can't go to a grocery store, you can only get those Ines. But what I discovered when I met people?

People were really friendly, especially if you're — if you're in their country and you try speaking their language first, they're usually really nice about switching to English. But if you just walk up to them and demand to, know something in English, that's rude. But what I learned from meeting so many people was they're just living their lives.

They're just trying to do their best. They're just trying to be happy, just like here.

And afterwards I I started thinking: God, there's so many design lessons you could learn here, and people are usually told: as a designer, you need to play a lot of games, you need to read a lot of books, you need to watch a lot of movies to learn things like plot and character and dialogue and scene. But guess what? I'm going to add travel to that list. I think to be a really good game designer, you should do some traveling and you especially should do some traveling out of your home country. I think it's really important to see other Customs, just how people do regular day-to-day things differently when they go.

To work, when they go to lunch, where they go to lunch, how long they go to lunch, what they eat for lunch. Just it's amazing to see other architecture, um, and — and that just goes without saying — that there's some architecture in other cities that we just don't have here and you probably don't have in your home country — how cities are laid out vastly different from country to Country. Some cities have really like restricted, like businesses are all here and homes are all here, and others mix it all up. There are lots of older buildings. It's really cool to go to a modern office that's in a building that's 700 years old.

We don't see that a lot in the United States. It's also interesting to see ruins, absolute, abject ruins, right in the middle of a city, like you're driving along and they like, oh, there's a Coliseum, that's 2,000 years old. Oh, look, there's an old Temple that's 1500 years old and it's crumbling, but they leave it there and they let people you can walk around it and it's amazing to see.

A lot of this makes you think of level design, which is the obvious design genre that you can learn from, but you can also learn a lot from mechanics, NPC, roles, the cultural impact on all those things in a way, in a, you will learn these things in a way you will never think about if all you do is read a book about those countries or watch a movie about those countries. Walking through a building, walking through a big Cathedral, is completely different than reading about it or watching a movie about it. I've used VR, especially during the pandemic, to travel all over the world and that's close. It was cool to stand at the base. Of the pyramids and look up. It was cool to go in cathedrals. I did a complete walking tour of — uh, the British Natural History Museum and it was amazing.

But nothing quite beats going There's just quality to the light, there's smell. Different countries smell different, their, plants smell different, the cities smell different. The food, the smell of the food, is amazing. I can't recommend highly enough doing some traveling. So if you, if you can find the time and the budget and a mode of traveling that suits you, whether it's highly uh, scheduled or not, or I like somewhere in between, I like some scheduled days and some days off, or a scheduled morning and a relaxing afternoon — do it, even if you just go and sit in a coffee house in a city in another country and people watch. You will learn so much and it will influence your design in ways you can't even imagine it doing when you're thinking about it now. Never thought I'd do a video like this. I'm not really known for being a traveler, but those are the design lessons that I learned while myself learning to become a better traveler, and I hope you do it yourself.
