+++
title = "CounterBite: Bloodlines Multiplayer Design"
date = "2025-04-11"
id = "YbbRAS1JL1A"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Vampire: The Masquerade - Bloodlines", "Multiplayer"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about counter bite, the Vampire: The Masquerade — Bloodlines multiplayer mode that we had suggested, that we had designed but never implemented for Vampire: The Masquerade — Bloodlines."
references = ["6iugDcbR-gE"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about counter bite, the Vampire: The Masquerade — Bloodlines multiplayer mode that we had suggested, that we had designed but never implemented for Vampire: The Masquerade — Bloodlines.

I've talked about it here and there in other videos. A brief recap — and remember I was not on Bloodlines team for the first two years — a brief recap — is part of the original design for Bloodlines that we were doing for Activision using valves engine from halflife was a multiplayer mode. It was written down, it was designed, but at some point when Activision was concerned about that — the single player game was really big and they wanted us to focus on it. They took multiplayer mode away from troa and gave it to another team — I don't know if it was an in-house Activision team or another out of housee team. They made a whole new design, didn't get very far with it I don't know what happened. I don't know if it was they weren't working out or Activision just didn't want to spend the. Money, but that whole thing got cancelled and bloodline shipped as a single player game. I did finally find our design document for what I always call counter Bite — part of the reason I had trouble finding it wasn't called counter bite, it just says multiplayer. It's chapter nine of the Vampire: The Masquerade — Bloodlines design document.

I'll read you part of it and describe what we were going to do. So I want you to have a good idea of what we were planning. But this never happened and this is a good example of cut content: that, while there does exist some code for this — in fact I found some uis in the vampire code for things — I think it was like dialogue and haggling — but it never got created. So let me talk about counter bite. I'll read you the first part of chapter 9 in designing the multiplayer aspect of vampire, the Masquerade. We have chosen to create a multiplayer experience that is entirely unique and separate from the single player game. In order to appeal to a wider market and play up the strength of valve's engine, we've decided to closely model vampire the masquerades multiplayer after Counter-Strike style of Cooperative team combat. By do doing so, we will create an exciting new venue for the online community. Not only can players get a game with their friends easily, get a game going with their friends easily — they can also join in games hosted by anyone online.

Each game will be exhilarating and quick, yet will Encompass the vital aspects of vampire the Masquerade. Players will choose to play either a vampire or human character. Vampires can be any of the seven clans available in the single player game and will spend experience points to customize their character. Just like the single player game, humans will belong to.

The New Order of Leopold and we have unique set of disciplines, such as Numa, as well as weapon choices made available only to them, such as stake launching guns and flamethrowers. While each game will only have two teams, the person setting up the server will decide each team's Allegiance from one of the nine options: chamaria, New Order of Leopold or any of the seven clans. This will allow for a wide variety of play, from Clan versus Clan to camaria Versus Society of Leupold. After a 5-minute round, players will receive an amount of money based on their performance — performance in that round. The money can be spent to purchase additional armor, weapons or ammo.

Prior to the beginning of the next round, at map rotation Points, each player will be given experience points based on their performance in previous rounds, as well as how much money they have retained. These points can be spent to further flesh out and develop their characters prior to the beginning of the next map, thus allowing for a wide variety of player types in the multiplayer Arena. Additionally, each map will take place, at least partially, in a populated area. Maintaining the Masquerade will be the utmost important in the populated areas.

Any breaking the grade will negatively affect the Player points for that round. So that was pretty cool. We had some more technical design. There's a configuration on the different modes of play. Um, for example, when your config, the configurations we had set up was team type, which every multiplayer game needs two competing teams. First, players will select what teams they wish to play and then choose what Clan. If they pick camaria, there would be team colors. I don't think I was involved in this part of the design. The default was red for Team 1 and blue for team two, but they provide a wide variety of colors so I imagine we'd have a color blindness option in there for people like me.

There's a map list to decide what Maps will cycle after a preset time period by adding the names on a chosen Maps list. There's a map cycle. The map cycle defaults to four rounds, but the server can change this to any round limit under 12. After four rounds the map changes to the next map on the list.

There are variety of scenarios and this is the cool part, because I had forgotten about this. The first scenario is team elimination. This map allows the players to fight a traditional clan war. The brown ends when all members of one team have been eliminated. Players are rewarded money and points depending on their kill to death ratio and infractions against the Masquerade blood hunt this map takes.

The highest rated character and marks him as the chosen. He's placed at the opposite end of the map from the rest of the players and his objective is to escape to one of the three possible exits. For example, get to the subway.

The Chosen blood hunt must escape from players belonging to two opposing teams. All of other members of the two teams started the opposite in the map with the instructions to kill the blood hunted one. Maximum points will be awarded for killing the blood hunt. However, points are also given for killing members of the opposing team and the round ends when either the blood hunted character makes it to one of the exits or is killed.

Uh, the third one, there, four of these. The third one's called K. Each team member has five humankind that they must protect. The goal of each team is to capture the kind of the opposite team and return them to their Haven or Safe House. The round ends when either the time expires after 5 minutes or the opposing team has been eliminated and notice that K can be captured several times each round. Bonuses are given for each kind in team's Haven, on top of the usual points for kills. And then the fourth one was called Embrace. This map is for a vampire versus Society of Leopold play. Only three humans have been chosen to receive the Embrace and the Society of Leopold has sworn to protect them. The vampire's goal is embra, to embrace all the humans.

Once a human has been embraced or completely drained, they fall to the ground. After 45 seconds they arise as a vampire and fight for the vampire team. The Society of Leopold will be armed with special potions that will counteract the effect of the Embrace once a human is on the ground, but must be given prior to them arising as a vampire.

The round ends either when the time expires, two humans have been embraced or one team has been entirely eliminated. Now this is really cool. We go on and explain numina that we had planned since num, since Mortals can't purchase vampire disciplines, uh, only G. Only vampires gain those abilities mortal Hunters are given. Numa Numa were holy powers that Hunters can wield as a result of their faith. They believe that they must eliminate these Monsters of the night, as commanded by God. These special abilities are empowered by, empowered by faith, and a human player starts with 15 Faith points that can be replenished if they pray at a holy sight.

Any type of human characters can purchase all of the following pnea, and we had one, let me see, we had um four Numa. Defined. We had Shield of Faith: each point of Faith spent gives the Caster a plus one to their soak. Maximum five for 5 seconds, like blood healing of the vampires. The abilities available to all in the order: casting time is 1 second to bring up a crucifix — one additional second for each point spent and 1 second to put away the crucifix. Divine Vision: this allows the Caster to see all the ores of creatures living and non-l living. Each level increases the Caster's visual range by 5 yards.

Holy Light: it creates a flash of light that will blind the undead. In addition, it will cause vampires to frenzy. Each level of the spell increases the area of effect by 10 yards. Casting time is 1 second to bring up the crucifix and one second to put it away. Finally, there's mind Shield: fortifies the mind of the Caster against any mind control. Or any of the Unholy mental attacks from vampires.

We had the renewing Faith system mechanic designed humans use Faith points instead of blood. These Faith points replace blood drops at the top of the screen with blue crosses. To regain Faith, humans must find a crucifix and pray. Crucifixes should be placed unconsciously throughout the level. The act of praying will put the character into a state similar to vampires: feeding it takes time, the camera will jump from their body and they will be vulnerable by praying.

By the way, these Cru fixes are different than the portable ones that the player would hold up to do casting this is talking about. Like a fixed, large crucifix, there's a point system. Players start with th000 points. Whenever there's a kill, points are distributed to the Killer and the victim. The same formula is used for both killer and victim. Points are rewarded to the Killer and points are subtracted from the victim. There's a whole list of points on here of eliminating enemies: breaking the Masquerade, killing an innocent, killing the blood hunted, The Blood Hunter, Escape. Embracing a Target — uh, embraced — a number of turns, start healing embraced, revert embraced, and each kind in your herd. There's a whole list of weapons we were going to include.

Uh, there are rules for breaking the Masquerade. There are rules for feeding and praying, which we talked to. There's money — we talked about. You.

Players earn and lose money by performing various actions. Money can be used to buy equipment at the start of the round and is also converted to character points at the start of every map — and remember, you play in the same map for several rounds. At the end of each round, a player is given $500. Additional money is awarded for character total. Points earned for that round at $100 per point. If a team loses, twice awarded an additional $500 per round until they win.

That's toe. Help prevent that. Once you start winning, it's almost impossible for the other side to catch up. Also, if an individual has $1,500 or more, they do not receive any additional bonus 500. So if you are on a team that loses and you're hoarding your money, there's a $1,500 cap on that experience points.

After four rounds — the default — a map change will occur. When a map change occurs, the characters remaining money is converted to experience points. The player will have 1 minute to adjust character stats to his liking. If the player still has not finished at the end of the grace period, the game will go on without that character and they have to wait to come in until the next round.

If you've ever had people, jam up a Lobby, you know where we put that role in. Then there's game. Flow players are Frozen at the start of a round called the grace period. They cannot move but still can purchase any type of equipment available.

Each rounde ends after 5 minutes and if neither team is won, a win is award depending on the following scenario: team elimination: the team with the most remaining characters wins. But at the end of the round, if the teams are equal, the round is a draw and no points are awarded. Blood hunt: if both teams have been eliminated by the blood hunted, the team will go. The win will go to the blood hunt team. The go to the blood hunted character. Else the round is a draw and the blood hunted character will remain the hunted character in the next round.

Kind: the team with the greater number of kindes in. Their Haven wins, however, if the kind is equal, the team with the greater number of remain in characters wins. If all else is equal, the round is a draw. And finally, for the Embrace: if the round ends and neither of the targets have been turned or they've all been killed, the wind goes to the hunters. Finally, Upon A player's death, they can enter in observer mode until next round, while in this passive mode they can fly freely around the level and watch the action. There are three types of Observer modes with server specified roles.

The first is Ghost mode, where the inactive player can move around the level completely and unobstructed. The second is locked Chase cam mode, where the player locked behind an active player that they can choose to observe. The third is freelook Chase cam: the player can swing the camera around a chosen active player being observed. They use the jump key, while in observer mode, to switch between those three modes. The fire button switches from one active player to the next. If the chase cam is activated, the player joins a game when a round is already in progress. They will be immediately placed into Observer mode for the rest of the round.

There's also a big list of weapons and equipment. Um, we already had server settings set up and we actually even put in a bunch of to C bars for controlling it. We had done some tests, and then the one last thing that was interesting is there's one note: there's an entire section called multiplayer deviations, because I've talked about single player and multiplayer games can't always have the same rules. The one that's called out — and I'm sure we would have had more — is for Solarity: Solarity in single player, in the single player game, Solarity. Speeds up the player using it. In the single player game, this was represented as slowing down the world. You can't do that in multi player. So for multiplayer gaming, Solarity will speed up the players as opposed to slowing down the world.

Note: this will be an optional server setting. You can choose not to allow Solarity at all. I don't know if we had talked about how easy the game would be play to play if your movement speed and action speed was simply sped up. So I think that's why we covered ourselves by saying you can have a server setting to just disable Solarity all together. Anyway, guys, that is all the notes we have on multiplayer for um.

Counter bite. This was dated September 2003, which is about the time I switched from Temple onto Bloodlines. I don't know how much of this is mine. I think most, of this, if not all of it, is not my design. I think, at this point, my only contribution to this was the name, which was not, did not appear in here and was never used, as well as this was never made, but I thought you guys would like to hear about this, because I love hearing about designs that never came to be, and this is more than just cut content. This is literally an entire design that was never, ever implemented anyway for you Vampire: The Masquerade — Bloodlines fans, I hope you like that.
