+++
title = "Temporary Buffs"
date = "2025-11-05"
id = "Ylo85VL_Mvw"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Character Systems", "Balance"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about temporary buffs."
references = ["wUI6LZaCKCg", "4vdu4k-krXQ", "SL_aTjKsxok", "96uGEA0r6Bo", "ne9IIn7nEV4", "ESVby0UG-Ao", "DnOmC1G3MPA", "xVNZZlmTSrg", "AK5nnqOCaCg", "N7b7LFXBZ9M"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about temporary buffs.

And I mean. What I mean by that are the buffs you get for a short period of time for having a spell cast on you or drinking a potion or maybe eating food in an RPG. This is based on a large set of questions asked by future Astrominer. I'm going to read all their questions, then I'm going to talk about it a little bit and then I'm going to go through each question in order and answer it. This is going to be long and it's going to reference a lot of videos, but that's actually something I need to talk about after I read you the questions. So let's start.

Future Astrominer asked: "You have spoken before on damage types and numerical item design, but I have a question on temporary buffs from consumables, eg cooking or alchemy, but possibly magic buffs as well. How do you design difficulty level of a game where, at higher difficulty settings, the buffs are needed to? Get through encounters — Example: potion of speed or food that is giving a recovery buff Two if you're using a damage type system? How do you inform the player that an encounter would go a lot easier if they were to bring potions of fire resistance to the fight with the fire giant, without informing them too often that they get annoyed by exposition from every NPC that they talk about to about the quest? Also, a pet peeve of mine is when the reward for fighting the fire giant is something that gives fire resistance and you never have to fight a firet type enemy again.

I get that, third question is: how do you set the bonus from temp, a temporary effect, to be something meaningful but not overpowering? Eg, a potion that gives 1% increase for one combat round, I'm more likely to sell as the effect is too low to be noticeable. And the final fourth question is: if you have cooking or alchemy skills for the player, how do you reward the player for engaging with that mechanic without it being a grind?

Please feel free to split this over multiple videos and in any order you see fit. Okay, future Astro Miner. That was a lot of questions, but they're all about temporary buffs and they're very specific, so I'm going to answer them in one video. But they're also very deep. Um.

I'm going to give one highle question for all, or answer that could apply to all of them, which is: buff hard, buff short, but players going to hoard Can't stop players from hoarding. We'll talk about that. I'm going to go through future Astro Miner's questions in order, but I'm going to tell you something before I start. I will be referencing so many videos and they'll all be linked.

In the description. I spent a few hours putting this answer together because it's complicated. These are very deep topics that depend on lots of other things in your game and kind of are predicated on other design issues that you have to make that I've already made videos on. So, rather than make this hours long, I will occasionally just go see this video and I'm going to assume you know what I'm talking about and I'm going to keep going.

This is not design 101. This is not a basic design video. This is an example — a perfect example, by the way — of how very simple questions that new designers may think — oh, that's going to be so easy. It's a simple question, right — Is actually a very has a very, very complex answer that is highly dependent on other things you may have already decided in your game. So let's get into it.

Let's start with the first question about having high difficulty settings in your game, needing buffs to get through. Now I did a whole video on difficulty settings, linked in the description. What I recommend doing is take your game, which runs on a normal difficulty, and then do the f the following: calculate what the average DPS damage per second is of the player versus the DR, the damage resistance of enemies. You know you could do this on a wide range of enemies and then decide this type of enemies. Go here From this — from the player DPS and the enemy DR, you can calculate the expected number of rounds that you think such a combat would last. If somebody's doing, if the player is doing, 10 rounds per uh, 10 damage per second, and the enemy has 100 health and no DR, you expect that to last 10 rounds Could be a little.

Less, could be a little more. This is just you're. You're doing pure modeling here, then, based on the player's health, you can get the level that they need to fight, because if the enemy is doing its own damage, whatever its DPS is, you can calculate how long the player, how many rounds it would take to kill the player. And if that's less, based on whatever the player's health — and probably based on his level — is, then you know how long that fight's going to last and whether the player's going to win it. What I just described is way harder, though, than what I just listed. And some of you are probably already going "Yeah, aside from the fact that there are random variables, let's throw that out. You can't do anything about that, just assume some kind of average bell curve or whatever".

Some player damage is very spiky meaning. The player won't do any damage for a while and then we'll do tons of damage. Wizards tend to be like that: rather than hitting, you know, every second or two, it may take them several seconds to cast their spell and then it does a ton of damage. And it does a ton of damage, maybe to a lot of enemies at once. That's described as spiky because it they do nothing or very little, and then a ton.

Player damage is also highly dependent on items they're carrying and what their skill levels are, which means they're also probably dependent on the player's level. I already assumed the player's health was going to be dependent on their level, but now their damage output is probably based on their level too. Meanwhile, when you're calculating enemies — and I just called it DR — I called it damage resistance. Well, it may be damage resistance. Which is incoming damage has a percentage of it removed, or it may be damage threshold, meaning any damage below a certain threshold just doesn't happen to the enemy. They may be able to block incoming damage. It may be something that they block all. They have a chance to block any incoming damage, or they have a chance to block one incoming damage. Then maybe they can't block area of effect. So it has to be one single targeted attack and maybe that all of those DRD and blocking is varies by what damage type you're doing to the enemy. So, right there, it's super complicated to make those calculations.

Once you have them, what you do is you make your higher difficulty, adjust those numbers And, as I mentioned in the difficulty vid, one common thing that happens at a higher difficulty is player damage is decreased, enemy damage and enemy DR is increased. And therefore that is a more difficult difficulty setting because it expects it lowers the expected rounds to kill the player, increases the amount to kill the enemy, um, or increases what the player level should be in order to have that encounter. Then what you do is you base your buff values on those numbers. So you think, okay, if you increase the difficulty this much and it makes the combat expect, for the same player level that got through it at normal, they would die before they made that, before they lasted the number of rounds needed to kill that enemy. Now they're going to need to be buffed. That's how you can make buffs kind of expected and required at higher difficulties. Now, if this sounds complicated, it is. This is really complicated because it You have so many interrelated values.

By the way, I worked with a system designer once who was the master of Excel. He was a spreadsheet master. I miss that guy. Working with him and figuring this stuff out was awesome. It made figuring out what temporary buffs and item damage and how much health the player should get per level and what kind of damage output enemies should have and what their damage resistance should be, and what happened at higher difficulty settings — All things that you control in a spreadsheet and play with.

Turn the knobs all you want. See everything that changed. Amazing. I highly recommend it, if you know spreadsheets, break them out.

For this part, This gets into the second question that future Astro Miner asked, which was: "How do you telegraph that enemies will use certain damage types". I have a video on damage types. You might want to go watch that. So we — I'm not going to define it here. First off, you need to know that some players need really, really obvious clues. I mean, come on, if it's not obvious enough.

Fire giants use fire. I don't know why you'd have to have an NPC explain that to anybody. But guess what? This is kind of a tight rope you're going to walk as a designer, because, if you, if a player knows the information, then to receive that information again feels patronizing. But if a player doesn't know the information and they miss the one or two times the game offered it, they will blame the game for not giving them enough information.

And, by the way, this happened to me. I was playing a game recently. You don't know need to know which one. I came to a locked door. I know that if I was strong enough I could have opened it and I know lockpick could have opened it. But I didn't have a lock good lockpick skill and I was out of lockpicks. So since I had neither, I left. I figure I'm not getting into that room.

Guess what It turned out? There was a backway into that room that you could only discover if you, because it was hidden behind a crate. You had to jump up on top of the crate and then look in the little narrow area between the crate and the wall and you could see a way into that room.

I didn't find it. That's my fault. I was being a dumb player there. But guess what?

Some people in QA and some people in focus groups will completely blame level design. They will go: "This is stupid, there was a room I couldn't get into". Very few players will. You had to have a really high strength or you had to have a really high lockpick and extra lock picks to get in there.

By the way, this kind of feedback is why you see yellow paint everywhere on ledges. And if you don't know what I'm talking about, you don't need to know. But this kind of mismatch between the game expects the player to meet them here and the players can be anywhere. Here is what causes games to get made more casual. Anyway, I like it when a game — to get back to Astro Miner's question — I like when a game has the clues you need to figure it out, but you had to ask for them or look for them yourself, for example. Um, maybe, like the NPCs won't tell you directly, hey, you better have some fire resistance potions when you go up against fire giants. Um, it's like: no, no, NPC told me about the door I was.

Required to jump around and look for it. So what I would have do in this fire giant example is you can ask the NPCs if you want. You can ask them, do you have any advice? And then they may go, well, I hope you have fire resistance stuff. They may also say: "Another party went before you and they didn't come back, so we think they died, so we don't think they prepared enough" So, in other words, really drive it home.

You're going to need this, also, if you get near where the fire giants are and you look at the battlefield, there may be scorched marks and burn bodies. You should be able to figure this out Personally, like future Astro Miner, I hate killing the fire giants. And then you get a bunch of fire resistance potions or fire resistance gear.

In fact, shouldn't you be dropping off? Of frost giants because someone geared wrong? So I totally agree with You should be able to get that type of stuff before you are up against a fire giant. And if you sold it or got rid of it or didn't bring it, that's your fault.

So three buff bonus ranges: I did a video on both skill design and damage numbers, like the actual values of damage numbers and the ranges they can be, that both of those can be in. Everything I said in those videos, which are linked below, apply here, because you need to have ranges that feel impactful but leave room for then the buffs to feel impactful. And this can. This buff range depends on so many factors. For example, what is the range of the thing being buffed?

Is it a, like an attribute that's 1 to 10, or is it 1 to 20?? Is it 1? To 100?

All of those, a plus one buff means something very different for all of those. Is the buff a number like plus one, or is it a percentage like plus 10%? That also depends on the previous one. If you have a range of 1 to 10, is one. If you have a range 1 to 100, 10% is 10.. So what did you pick for those underlying values? Then you have to ask: do buffs stack? If you have two buffs that buff the same skill or attribute or damage output or whatever, do they add together or is it something else, like the largest buff wins out? Sometimes some games even have whatever buff was applied last wins. You have to make decide those rules.

Is there when you have one source to buffs, whether it's a spell or an item or a potion or anything, does it just give one? Bonus or does it give multiple bonuses? Because that can depend how it stacks. It could be that the individual elements stack with individual elements from other buffs, or it could be one buff wins out — It's the last buff applied Wins out on all of its effects. So you can even do stacking in wildly different ways. You have to think of all this stuff when you're trying to figure out the ranges for both the buff and what it buffs. So I can't give an answer here because it depends on all those. But watch those two videos on skill number ranges and damage number ranges to get a good idea of what to do there. And then, finally, the last question was about whether cooking or alchemy.

And I'm just going to say crafting, to be general, Whether crafting, how to make crafting not feel so grindy. I see two forms of grind, when it comes to anything crafting. It's collecting the ingredients you need to uh craft, which may also mean the recipe itself, and also then making the items. If you want to prevent the collection grind, you can just say: well, what is it about the ingredients that you have to go get? Are you have that you have to go get? Are they common?

Maybe even purchasable — And I have a whole video on economy. You want to talk about making crafting ingredients purchasable, because game economy itself is hard and everything I'm talking about here depends on that. You can, you can. You can do that. You make them common or you can say that they only stacked with a limited way in a limited stack. So maybe you, once you get 20, doesn't matter if you find any more. You can't have any more in your inventory than 20.. This will discourage hoarding. By the way, I have a video on player hoarding which I conclude that, like save scumming, No matter what you choose to do, some players are going to hoard, Just players be hoarding. Players who hoard are going to hoard and almost nothing you can do can stop that. You can discourage it, You can make it almost completely unnecessary, but they're still going to do it. If you don't want common ingredients that either you can find everywhere or purchase, you can make them uncommon and then encourage exploration in your game. Is exploration a design pillar of your game?

Only you know that You can also make collecting ingredients skill dependent. So you can see things that you could harvest or mine, but when you go to do it says you're not, your skill isn't high enough. This can be very aspirational if you want players to find things and know I'll. Be able to come back and do that or I'm too low level to do it, but this is something cool. I can spend my points and then I know what to do with it.

Aspirational is a really important. Is it one of your design pillars? I don't know.

What is your game about? You should be asking yourself this, now, the second kind of grind is the crafting grind: Actually making the things that you found, all those ingredients for. You can do many things here. You can limit how many you can make. The same way, you limited how many ingredients you can carry. Maybe you can only carry around three of these, maybe you can only carry around one, or you can put a limit based on your crafting skill. This would be: do two things.

One: you may not even be able to use some recipes because you're not skilled. Enough, or you may not be able to carry around many of them, because that is also dependent on your skill. You know, if you're not a very good alchemist, you can only carry around two or three of these potions because you don't know how to carry them.

They're always breaking You. Better at skill, now you can carry around four or five of them Makes sense to me. You can also limit how many you can carry either by a hard stack value in your inventory or by the skills, or by encumbrance.

Yeah, encumbrance has entered the chat. I have two different videos on encumbrance because people have strong opinions about encumbrance and no matter which side, what you decide to do about encumbrance, people will.

There are some group of players who will hate it, Which means no matter what you do to decide how much to limit ingredients or resulting crafted items or consumables — people are going to hate that too. Just pick one that fits with your game and that's the best you can do. As for a reward for crafting, you can give experience points for collecting ingredients. You can give experience points for crafting ingredients. It depends on what you picked above — whether you should choose those options. Also, instead of XP, you could restrict skill increases to what skills were used.

I'm not sure I recommend that. I have an entire skill-based XP video. You should watch that to see if you would love to restrict the player improving a crafting skill based on their use of it. Maybe it fits with your design, maybe it doesn't. But future Astro Miner. I hope I answered all your questions. They were really good ones, and please watch all the other videos that are associated with this one.
