+++
title = "Working In Teams"
date = "2024-06-17"
id = "yqk-A-MmrbE"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Management"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about working in teams — something you will almost inevitably have to do if you go in the game industry — and I want to tell you why I'm talking about this."
references = ["SrAuoqdl0os", "Gtcl1ZbWyX8", "F7uaMQnMsvI", "sYZCYDRQtSs"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about working in teams — something you will almost inevitably have to do if you go in the game industry — and I want to tell you why I'm talking about this.

So last night, poking around Netflix, I found a Duran Duran documentary. Now, I was really big in Duran Duran in the 80s and then they made this comeback in the 90s and it was interesting to watch the history of it.

But what really spoke to me? They did an interesting thing where they started with all of them together talking and then they went to each one individually and talked to them about how they grew up and what, why they wanted to become a musician and how they got into the band and what they thought about being in the band and why they — some of them — eventually left, why they left the band. Um, in fact, the whole documentary was pretty much could be summarized — as the band came together lasted for a few albums then. At their Peak, members of the band started to leave, even after just a few albums, and they talked about that and that spoke to me as someone who's been at different companies with different teams and a couple times I've also walked away. Um, so I wanted to talk about what they mentioned as lessons of working in teams, and then I want to talk about kind of what I want to, what I took out of both what they said and some of my own experiences.

One thing they mentioned which really resonated was that everyone in the band kind of came from different places. They were all from Birmingham, but they all had different backgrounds and they kind of were interested in different things, and so what happened is they intersected in Durant Duran, and that was important to be, because, if you think about it, if you come from different places and you intersect, that's where Duran Duran was. But it made sense for why they broke, up later, because they were, they were heading different directions and later on they were farther apart, they wanted to do different things. It wasn't that they were all together and in agreement on Duran Duran, it's just later they were doing different things. And what's interesting is even later, after that, after some of them knew themselves better, they rejoined and the band kind of got back together because they understood, hey, some of the things that were annoying us and some of the things that we didn't agree on. I Now understand my part of causing those issues, but also I Now understand what I really want, not just what I think I want, and that's just something that comes with experience. Um, I mean, I'm going to say that you know I've worked with different teams. And because I walked away with some of them, I can honestly say it's because sometimes work this team resonated and sometime it didn't.

Um, they even comment on that. That many of them said once they left Duran Duran and they worked with different people. They found that really, really energizing and I can say that there's something about when you go to a new company or you have a new project startup at an existing company and there's a different team working on it. There's this really energizing feeling that comes with that, because you are working on something new, which is energizing in itself, but there's different people and they have different ideas of how things should be done and different processes, different goals, and it's it really gets you going again and makes you think, okay, let's.

Look at all the things that we examined as being pillars in. The last game and see what we can do better.

They also said that many of them mentioned that when they were on stage actually doing their thing, playing music, they realized this was the magic of the group. But when they're off stage, that's when things diverged. Some of them wanted to do drugs, uh. Some of them wanted to have lady friends. Some of them wanted to do music of different genres of you know, They described Durand Duran as being alt Rock, punk. I'm like H, but they wanted to do different things. Um, some of them wanted to do Arty music. Some of them wanted to do a lot more dance, kind of driving music.

It's great, and I thought that was the fact that they could realize that what meant they had gotten to at least a more mature place where they get, say I, this, is what. We're doing, I want to do something else and I think it's fine. I think it's weird when people are like, no, you agreed to do this and you were locked in Forever.

That's, not a mature way of looking at it. And they even comment how the people above them were worried because they saw. I think they said they saw a boat of money and it was now going in a different direction away from them and they didn't want to not be on that boat of money anymore.

Trust me, that statement resonated with me something. I think Simon Lebon talked about this. I think the next two comments both came from him. One thing: he said that just me go.

Oh yeah, I know what Shing about. He said the first time Duran Duran made an album that reviewed worse than the previous ones was an awful, experience, because you made these albums that people were like this album's great, oh my God, this album's even better. Third one was like I can't believe this album's even better. Then they made an album. It was either their fourth or fth album and people were like hm, and he said it was just, it was awful. It was an awful experience because they were unprepared for it.

You know it's coming. You're not always going to just keep making better and better Stuff. Plus you want to make different stuff, plus your audience gets used to things and so they have expectations that now you know you're not going to meet. Before they knew what you were doing. They didn't have expectations, now they have expectations. And he said it was an awful experience. But he said once they got through it, was kind of freeing.

On their next albums they could make. Stuff and if people didn't like it as much, it wasn't as bad as the first time. They got a lower review.

I totally understand that it's. My games have gone up and down in terms of popularity, sales, critical review, game player review, and none of those correlate with how I feel about the games and I realized what he was saying was: that's okay, it's going to happen. If you make more than one game, that is going to happen.

And then finally, some the documentary ended with him saying something that made me go. Yeah, it's like he was speaking to me. He said: the fact that we're still here after more than 40 years later, that's saying something. And I went: yeah, I've done this for over 40 years and I'm still doing it, not as much, but that says something.

I don't know whether it said: things about stubbornness or perseverance or talent. I don't know what it's saying, but it says something.

Um, and the documentary ended and I just sat there for a while and thinking about how this random documentary I just watched about Duran Duran spoke to me in a way that I don't think that the people making it expected a game developer to be sitting there going uhuh, uhhuh. I totally see that, so it made me think about my own game catalog, and how every game was a combination of what I brought to it and what everybody else on the team brought to it. For me, my contribution was a combination of what Authority I was given and what passion I had, and those things were not necessarily correlated. I'm not saying that I cared about games the more Authority I was given or vice versa, because that's not. True, there were games I really loved that I had very little say in. And then there were games I started getting tired of even though I had a lot of say in them. So but what I'm saying, my com direct combination was sometimes in some of my games I had a great deal of authority.

The buck stopped with me. Nothing went in that I couldn't have thrown away and had nobody override me. And then there were other games I made where I was kind of peer level with other people who had equal Authority to me on what went in and what didn't, and I didn't always win those discussions. So things went into the game that I'm like I wouldn't have done that, but the other person really, really wanted it done. And then there were other games where I had very little authority.

Um, I just somebody working on it. Or at least in one case I had Authority that was taken from me by someone else — peer level — and the person in charge was like: eh, so I'm used to having multiple levels of authority in my game. Like I said, this didn't correlate to my passion. My passion of the game was how much that game was like something I would personally want to make. Did it have a lot of the design pillars that I've talked about here, where I really wanted reactivity and nonlinear story and player agency and all of that stuff?

Some of my games have it, some of them don't. It was a combination of. You know, like I said, what kind of control I had of the game, but also how much I was feeling it. You know how much I really wanted to try to impose my, own passions on this game. Sometimes I wanted to see what the other person wanted or, and if there was someone else in charge, I kind of wanted to see what's a game made by this person like. So it wasn't my passions that brought me into work every day, it was my curiosity of, oh, this person's in charge.

Now I'm really curious how they will make decisions about this. How will they fix things that I never figured out how to fix? You know, that was. That was a big chunk of it right there, which brings me to the team. When I worked with other people, I found that that some of the stuff they brought to the table really affected the game. Some of it was how much they agreed on the direction the game was going, either at the beginning, when we were trying to get consensus on the design pillars, or if it was somebody who came in halfway through, and how much they agreed in the direction the game was already going and sometimes how much they even understood the direction the game was going. Because sometimes I worked with people who they joined the team and it was like they had always been there. They were immediately suggesting things that were perfect, that fit the world perfectly, that fit with lore, fit with our design pillars, our goals perfectly.

And it worked with other people who, every step of the way they seem to be trying to make a different game and sometimes I love their ideas and I tell them that's a great idea, it just doesn't belong in this game. Sometimes I'd be like I don't even like that idea and it's certainly not going in this game. But one day you be you, make that game with that idea and let's see if it works. So there was that agreement on and direction, that Focus. But there was also: you have a big team. They all bring different Talent and strengths to the table and I found that my games often were the result of what the whole team could do.

If there was somebody who was really good at doing a certain thing, like the clay heads in Fallout, that really informed what our final Talking Heads looked like in the game, because we had this really good sculptor in other games. I've worked on games where I wanted to have certain features, but there was really no one on the team who could do that I couldn't do either. So that game didn't have that feature. And maybe it was a feature I had on a previous game, but I'm not working with that person anymore and that was the feature that that person brought. I'm used to teams having different strengths and talents. What's difficult is when your own team isn't self-aware about their own strengths and talents, when they're trying to do things that they're not good at doing, when they're trying to do things that they think will end up well. They think what they in now is just a rough stage, but they're get through it and you're like I do not see that happening. And this is when it's difficult to give critique, because people get very wrapped up in what they're doing.

Um, so that's kind of the um, the point of this video. Um, I was I started about talking about working in teams and what I learned from a Durand Duran documentary and what I learned myself, but I I think sort of the moral of this video. The summary is: look, unless you're a solo Indie developer, you are going to have to. Work in teams, and you're going to have to learn to work in teams, and a big chunk of that is learning about yourself.

What are you good at? What aren't you good at? How do you? How do you give and receive criticism?

How do you just on a dayto day work with other people? How much do you agree with the direction your game is going? Do you think that direction should change and how much are you going to push that?

These are all things that you have to know about yourself going into a team, knowing what, Authority you're going to have, where your passion is, what you're good at, what you're not good at. If you understand all that about yourself, you're working in teams will go a lot more smoothly.

So, and if you don't believe me, take it from Duran Duran. So I hope you like this.
