+++
title = "Chocolate"
date = "2024-03-29"
id = "YUaellOkDGc"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Real Life"]
summary = "Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today's Friday. So let's talk about something fun."
references = []
+++

Hey everyone. It's me, Tim. Today's Friday. So let's talk about something fun.

That I will loop back to game development at the end, and what I want to talk about is chocolate. Do not underestimate how much I'm into chocolate. I love chocolate, I love eating it, I love talking about it I have a whole blog, which I'll link to, which has thousands of entries, each one with a different ch, where I talk about who gave it to me, where it came from, what cacao percentage it is. Is it milk, dark chocolate, white chocolate, rose chocolate, which is the special Fourth Kind of chocolate, which is kind of like the plasma of the Chocolate World. At one point I could eat a bite of chocolate and tell you within 5% what the cacao percentage was, and sometimes I would tell you what country it was from. If it was single origin, I could tell you: oh, this is Ecuador, this is Madagascar, this is Ghana, because there would be a particular flavor to it.

There'd be. Something earthy or fruity or floral, or it would taste like a berry, or it would taste like you would swear it would have coffee in it, but it doesn't. So I've been doing this for years and when I was in grad school, one of my roommates said: you should really keep these labels.

We're eating a delicious chocolate from Italy. And he said this is labels too beautiful to throw away here. I have a spare photo album. You should just keep a label, every chocolate label you ever eat. And I started that I made, I filed, six photo albums before I went all digital and that's why there are thousands of entries in my chocolate bog, but my bookcases back here are not filled with, uh, chocolate photo albums. But as I got older, especially when I hit my 40s, I was like I can't eat all this chocolate.

You, just can't do it. Especially my doctor said you need to cut that out. So I wanted to try new chocolate still, but I did not want to eat at all. So I started at carbine the chocolate eating meeting. This was a 15minute meeting at 3:00.

Every day I would just I sent out a message saying: hey, at 3 pm I'm going to have a new chocolate bar on my desk. I'm going to break it up into pieces is show the label if you want to come by and try it. If you, if you're in a meeting, you know don't leave the meeting, but if you're free, come on by, try a piece of chocolate. Take a look at the label, there were some people who came by occasionally. There were some people who came by almost every day. Those latter people got really good at judging chocolate as well. I.

Got some people to switch from liking milk chocolate to dark chocolate, when they realize just how much better dark chocolate was and how hideous white chocolate was. But what was really cool about this? It was a, nice break in the middle of the day. It was a night, nice mental respite, respit, and I had noticed back at interplay in the 90s that there were people who seemed to know each other, even though I never saw them go to lunch, I never saw them on the same project, they didn't sit near each other, but they somehow knew each other and I found out it was from their smoke breaks. There was a lot of connection going on in smoke breaks and I thought we're do a chocolate break and the same thing can happen, and what I noticed was people would come in and they would talk about all sorts of things besides chocolate. We might talk about a new movie or a new TV show, what games we were playing, places to go in the area.

People would talk about all that, but they also would treat the chocolate eating meeting when they realized that, hey, this space had a lot of different people coming: programmers, artists, designers, QA production, sound guys — they were all there and people were like, huh, while I'm here, hey, programmer, did this new tool finish? Did this feature go in? Or hey, sound guy, I had this cool, I heard this cool song and I think it would be go great in our game for this area. Or hey, level designer, I got stuck in geometry in this level, did you know? It's not big enough for combat. That happened a lot at these chocolate eating meetings, so I found that it was probably one of the most productive.

15. Minutes every day, because somebody got something really good out of it, even if it was justest. They were stuck on something tough and they needed to take 15 minutes of not thinking about it or looking at it, versus one day somebody said, hey, I'm working on X, and another programmer went: that's already implemented, it's in this module. Guess what? That person probably saved a day or two of programming time because he didn't know that some esoteric thing he was about to code was already coded and exposed in another class that he didn't know about.

So that's when I went: wow, chocolate eating meeting is paying off. Interestingly, I would sometimes meet with co-workers on the weekends at chocolate stores. Uh, friend of mine wrote me and said: new chocolate store in Laguna, Niguel, and like we'd plan an afternoon around it, like we'd meet there, take pictures, take pictures inside, go. To lunch afterwards, talk about the chocolate we bought. I took a trip to France in 2006 — and while I was in Paris, I looked up a chocolate store. I always wanted to see lame chakat, the chocolate house. Then, when I went to go give a conference in Sydney in 2016, I worked in an entire afternoon to go to, uh, five different chocolate shops and I took pictures of me at each one, which I think the people working there thought I was a little daff or whatever, but I was so excited to be there, to be in a, store, that I might have eaten a chocolate bar from you know, a decade before, and now I'm actually in that store. Never thought I'd be there, so I took pictures of that soon because I would bring all this chocolate.

People would at work, would come back from vacation, really. Excited to bring a new chocolate. They would check my blog because my blog, at the very top of it, has a search function. So if they were on vacation somewhere and they saw a bar and they're like I don't know if Tim's had this, they check the blog and if it was new, they buy it, and they were super excited to bring it to the next chocolate meeting, and that was really cool because they were like getting into it themselves and it extended the chocolate EA me. I mean, we literally had this every day for years.

The coolest thing, though, was when new employees would start. When people would start on my team. I would often tell them: hey, at 3:00, come on by, we're having a chocolate eating meeting. They like: what's that?

Now you could tell some of these people were brand new to the industry: Juniors, very young. Maybe fresh out of high school or fresh out of college, and they were like my God, why is the director inviting me to his office? But then they'd come, they'd see a whole bunch of people there. I think one time we had 12 people crammed into my office. They'd see the chocolate, they'd see the label, they'd see everyone talking about the chocolate and they just sit there and they'd eat it and they'd listen and then people would start talking about the game. You know, hey did.

Have you guys seen this Easter, seen this? Have you guys seen this Easter egg? Have you seen this really cool thing.

And they' learn a lot, and some of them said they used to come even without saying anything, just to listen to what was going on. And I thought that was really cool, because I've heard people talk about onboarding of new employees. And it's very. Sometimes it feels very sterile. It's like, well, when we onboard a new employee, we buy donuts and put them on their desk or we take them to lunch with each of these different groups every day. I mean it's nice. I'm not saying those things aren't nice, but they're very forced and very fabricated. Where this was: hey, new guys work working on figuring something out and trying to figure out where everything is, and they stop by the chocolate ity meeting and people go: hey, how you doing?

How are you? He goes — I can't figure out perforce since May goes, oh, I'll swing by and show you where all the folders are.

Boom, that 2minute interaction probably saved hours of that new person fumbling around in perforce. So I really love that, and what I really really loved is all of this happened in 15 minutes. We rarely had chocolate.

Meetings last longer than that. We — you know people — because the chocolate would get eaten and sometimes people would start talking about something and go, oh, I want to show you something. And they'd go back to their desk so they could show them something in the game. So it tended not to last long, but it was a not only a nice little mental break, but it also, paradoxically, was also kind of a team stimulation time. It was everybody got excited about something that somebody brought up during the meeting, or, uh, somebody just happened to ask a question about, and it started this whole discussion and then off they're, off to someone's office to look at a new piece of art or a new level or a new feature that was being coded, that wasn't checked in yet, and I thought that was really cool and people used to ask me later: because. I got asked back at interplay: how do you keep your team morale up so high?

And I didn't know, I was just like it. Just it happens. By the time I got to obsidian- 20 years, 30 years later, I kind of knew that this would happen. Don't get me wrong.

The chocolate eating meeting was for eating chocolate, but I knew it would have this kind of side effect and I knew people would like it — new people, had been on the team for a long time. It had this nice team building effect, without that artificiality of we're going to have a team building exercise where we break you into groups of six and see who can support an egg with rubber bands. Okay, there were people would go to that and never open up and those same people would come to the chocolate eating meeting and Go. Girl Scout thin Min. Brownies, yes, and the next thing you know they're talking about how they have two daughters who were in Girl Scouts and you know how they take them out on their, your, their cookie, um, selling Venture That Girl Scouts to every year. It was fun. It let co-workers kind of chat with each other and every now and then a really important game discussion happened. So so never, ever, underestimate how much I like chocolate and the power of the chocolate eating meeting.
