+++
title = "Arcanum Magick Design"
date = "2025-11-12"
id = "YUTBnZLYSRk"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Arcanum", "RPG Design"]
summary = "I talk about Arcanum's magick design and specifically what my goals were and whether I think I achieved them."
references = ["N7b7LFXBZ9M", "keTG-5WPccU", "KZTkg50ihsU"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about Arcanum magic design.

But first let me address what's going on. New digs haven't had time to even unpack the books into the bookshelves when Anubis1101 asked some really good questions And, as a super mutant, he gets a priority video, which means I just dropped what I was doing. I said "Stop Hammer time", well, stop Arcanum time And did this video And it'll be up. Um, I think Monday's is already up, so it'll be up on Wednesday. But then expect things to go back to the old digs for a while, because I had a lot of video in the queue. But anyway, let's get into Anubis's questions. He asked: "Tim, I'm really curious about the magic colleges in Arcanum and how you would approach such a system for a new game.

How do you go about designing and filling out all the different types of magic once you've established the setting There? Obvious ones, like elements, but less obvious ones like meta, my favorite one thematically. Also, how do you balance utility spells like teleport that don't have a direct combat impact, so that all the colleges feel somewhat useful? Is this something you do at the design stage by filling the world with enemies or situations to use it, or is it better to self-contain the magic system and not let it influence design in other areas? And lastly, what do you think went well with Arcanum's magic and what would you do different in future fantasy games?

Feel free to break this up or even omit parts of my questions if you like. I'll accept whatever you have to say". Great, I love when people accept whatever I have to say.

So let's dive into Arcanum magic design. By the way, all these questions are related to each other, um, since how I filled out the colleges were related to how I balanced them, and how I even decided to have those colleges. So let's just talk about first the overall design in Arcanum. I followed my rule for Arcanum. We started with the Arcanum setting And it was just Leonard and Jason and I and we talked about we wanted a magic and tech setting. We talked through what we wanted in that, especially the magic and tech being at odds — And then we talked about what story we wanted, because we wanted a really good story. When all that was behind us, we sat down to make system mechanics and I was working on magic And that meant magic came after setting and after story and was influenced by both of those things, which is as I think they should be for an RPG. That's the order I think things should go. So, because we had already had those things done, I knew magic was supposed to.

Be old. I knew it was supposed to be really varied. Um, I knew I wanted stereotypical magic users that you see in classic fantasy RPGs as well as off the beaten path ones.

If you remember, I had a video called design pillars. I'll link it below And I went over the Arcanum design pillars Real quick.

They were tech that mattered: rich class creation, complex stat-driven game, huge main story, quest and multiplayer. The second and third one there, the character creation and the stat-driven game system, are what's important about kind of looking at magic system in Arcanum and seeing if I achieved those goals. For the second one, a rich character creation, we didn't have classes. But I knew I wanted the standard fantasy wizards, so that meant elemental magic right away. We needed fire spells and earth spells and air spells and water spells, Not just throwing fireball or you know gust of wind, but also being able to summon those elementals.

I knew I wanted clerics and priests, so I knew I needed some healing, which turned out to be white necromancy, because it turns out, or necromancy, it turns out — healing is a form of necromancy. I knew I wanted nature spells to support druids. I I wanted all of this. In addition, I wanted the real dark necromancy spells, because I want zombies. We also wanted speak with dead, because we'd already talked about how we wanted the main story to go. So we knew what quests we wanted, which meant some of our quest backup was: oh, if you kill this person, you can still speak with dead, You can still talk to the dead spirit of the person and still get the information you want. It was a backup in case they didn't have a journal or key to something. Or something you needed from them was only something they knew. That lets you still get through that.

One thing I wanted to do, though, is I knew I didn't want all the standard fantasy tropes. I liked meta magic, I liked magic that affected other magic. I knew I wanted temporal magic, like slowing people down or speeding them up or time stop. I wanted that stuff too, so that generated a bunch of different colleges, and I knew I wanted spells in them. Now Anubis asked about balance, which kind of makes me smile, because if you played Arcanum, you know the balance wasn't really much of a uh priority in that game.

I've said this before. I will say it again because it bears repeating.

If you are playing Arcanum, you essentially are playing a shipped alpha. It is not even a beta. We didn't even get to the bug fixing. As soon as we hit alpha, where all the features were done, the game was pretty much sent out the door.

There was no time to balance, much less look at some spells and go "I think this one needs to be replaced". So there are some spells on those college lists that I'm like, uh, I'm not sure I would have kept those. But if you look at design pillar number three, what a rich, stat-driven, uh, complex character cre — uh system.

I think we achieved that goal, think we? I think we achieved that goal. Magic was very complicated. Everything affected it. The player attributes like constitution went into your fatigue and your spell resistance, and intelligence determined what spells you could use, and willpower also affected fatigue and spell resistance, but also determined what spells you could learn. Your player level factored in Even the items you chose to. Use, because those items could affect your magic tech, the position on the magic tech meter, which would then alter how effective your spells were. So there was just so much that went in even before you picked a spell and cast it. So I thought that was really cool. I think we achieved that, but let's take a look at some other goals, and did I achieve them? I wanted people to be able to make classic wizards and I think that came through. I think people could make the standard you know old wizard or just you know person who wants to cast some spells.

I think that was supported. I think we also could support classics like rangers and druids and clerics and paladins and warlocks and necromancers. I think all of those tropes got fit. But I think there were a lot of crazy mixes possible too and a lot of new. Style of casters and, I think, based on some crazy player builds I've seen over the last two decades, I think we've achieved that goal of being able to make classic stereotype, to being able to make classic stereotype wizards and new ones as well.

As for your question on utilities, my I'll tell you what my goal was. Every magic college was supposed to have, at the very minimum, a spell that was useful in combat, that either did damage or affected a combatant some way, so they did less damage or something. And then a utility spell, which was a utility, was defined as it helped you in exploration. You know, maybe it helped you climb up something or un — or find a trap or open a lock or just avoid combat altogether by going invisible or, you know, teleporting past something, Um any kind of even healing. General support, all of those spells, and then I also wanted every college to have what I called a showcase spell, which was something aspirational, that when you were looking at the college list you went, "I really have to take that college, That's the spell I want to get".

Usually it was the highest one, It was level five, but not always. I don't know if I achieved that goal. I would say no, but that was what I was trying to do And if I could go back, I would probably adjust, change some spells and balance others to try to achieve that goal. I also really, really wanted to make it so that if your build was a generalist, you dabbled in at many of the colleges — perhaps all of them, that was a viable build — As well as specialists who would decided, "I'm going to deep dive into just one or two colleges and that's all. I'm going to have and all I'm going to cast".

I wanted both of those kind of builds to be viable And I think the one-point fiasco — which I have a whole video about that you can read it, you can look at it below — I think that worked against this goal. I think that's the one of the reasons I didn't want it, because I I felt that it worked against this generalist specialist balance I was trying to go for. So overall, I don't think I I succeeded in goals with the Arcanum magic design. But I will say this: If I had had a few more months to work on the game, that would have been part of the balance. Some of the spells would have been replaced and the other spells would have been balanced so that, like harm isn't just the most obvious, best spell.

You. Can take in the game.

If I were going to make a future game, the two things I want to say is: I really like Will Wright's rule of letting simple rules allow complexity to emerge. And I think that's how I would put together a magic system in the future. I would make very simple rules for how magic worked And for each college or type of magic I'd make a very simple rule for how it worked and then they'd all follow that rule. But complexity would emerge because maybe spells could interact or maybe there were spell building blocks that you could combine that could interact. And, on that note, I really liked Tyranny's spell building rules. That was a really fun system, if you haven't played Tyranny, I recommend it was a very fun way of doing magic and letting the player make more magic.

And I would also look into doing something like that. I think that's a direction I would go on future games of mine that included some kind of magic. Anyway, I hope that answered all of your questions. Anubis1101, and for everyone. I will try to get this all cleaned up soon.
