+++
title = "Teaching"
date = "2024-09-16"
id = "zCBEonAqs8k"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Careers"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about teaching, in terms of what lessons I learned by teaching and kind of how I applied some of those lessons to game development."
references = ["RY_tqjx_iFc", "Kh5JMp5_5nQ", "kdeDSAcLZa8"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about teaching, in terms of what lessons I learned by teaching and kind of how I applied some of those lessons to game development.

I've mentioned that I was a grad in graduate school for four years, four and a half um from late 87 to Mid 91, and during the time as a graduate student, uh, I was at University of California, Irvine UCI, their school of information and computer science. During those four years I had to be a teaching assistant — it's they will pay you to be a TA and I ta a lot of classes. I te programming languages, uh, basic. I ta te um operating systems and that's one I actually really liked. I operating systems through three times because I really like the professor, uh, Steven Franklin, and it was taught at 8:00 in the morning and it was an optional class, so it was full of students who really wanted to be there because they didn't need to be and it was 8. In the morning so it kind of weeded out people who didn't want to learn about operating systems.

But one class I had to teach was on neural networks and I knew that was going to be ass signed to me, it was coming up and, um, I had never had a class. My undergraduate degree at the University of Virginia did not include neural networks, so I studied neural networks. I had already kind of dove into them a little bit because I was at UCI to get a PhD in AI, so I dove into neuron networks lightly. But I went in deep dive because I did not want to TA a class I didn't know about. What I loved about it was I stayed ahead of the students and it was a good class. And after it was over I was having lunch with the another ta and I turned to him and I said, could you tell that I myself have never had a class in neural networks? And he was like what he goes? I heard you explaining things, you know hidden layers and feedback, and I was like, yep, I learned all that within the last six months, so that was interesting. Um, I've subsequently gone back and taught uh game development classes at UCI. I have a video about it I went back in 99 and then again in 2000 and I taught classes there and I really enjoyed it and since then I've gone to conferences and given uh talks on game development. I've done this channel.

What I love about teaching in general — and true for all those things — is it forces you to really think and examine the process that you're talking about. Sometimes you just do things, they just you just do them. You don't think about it, but having to explain it to another person, meaning you have to go back and think about all the things you just did and you have to collect them together, you have to organize it and you have to codify it. So, along the way, all those different teaching things I did — from being a TA to going back to teaching classes, to going to conferences, to being doing this channel — I have been forced to learn things. As I taught, I had to think about ways. My thoughts on game development has changed over the years, because if someone asked me a question and I start answering, I'll be like: well, this is how I used to do it, but now I do it this way and it's because the old way caused these problems and I couldn't figure out a solution to those problems and the new way doesn't have those problems. And every now and then you — I find myself talking to someone — go: oh well, did you try solving it this way? And my common answer is: where were you 20 years ago, because that's a really good solution? I also have to talk about where I failed. That is a common question.

Uh, I got it both years I taught at UCI. People said, well, what did you ever mess up? And I have a whole video, um, about lessons I learned from failure. And I think it's important to think about where you failed, because I that that whole video is about how I think I you learn more from failure than success. Failure will teach you, but only if you pay attention to it. If you don't pay attention to it, then you're in that standard. You know PE people who don't pay attention to history are doomed to repeat it if you don't. Pay attention to why you're failing, you will continue to fail. So you have to really examine your failure and accept it and then do something different next time.

I think when I examine my game development, I have to divide it into ways that I think are better and ways I prefer, because some of the ways I prefer aren't necessarily better, they're just more comfortable to me, they come easier to me. But occasionally I'm like: but this other way is better and it's got to be a lot more work for me and I don't think that way. That's when I often try to find someone to work with. Or, if I'm a director, I try to find leads that are good in those other ways that reinforce what I'm bad at or reinforce what I'm not. I can be good at it, but I don't like going that direction we all have. A way we like to steer, and I'm like I don't tend to steer this way. I get someone who's like let's steer that way, we're going, that we're going to that Island.

Sometimes, though, your preference boils down to the difference between how you like to develop a game and how you like to play it, and you have to keep those separate. Sometimes, the game development process requ requires you to play the game in ways you don't like. If you watch my video on all the different ways I played The Outer Worlds, there were ways I played that game that were not natural to me, and I didn't even like playing him that way, but I understood that you have to play him that way because you're trying to make a game that will appeal to more people and is solvable under different player builds, so you have to separate. This is how I like to develop versus here's how I like to play, because sometimes you're going to make a game that's playable in ways you don't like to play, so that's something to keep in mind. Now I've run into a few similar things that remind me of teaching and what I've learned from teaching.

One of them is pared programming is when, either when you're doing code or you're debugging code or optimizing code, you sit down with another programmer and you do it together. What's interesting about parro programming is having to explain your code to another knowledgeable programmer is very eye openening, because sometimes the programmer will just ask very fundamental basic questions like: why are you using that sort? Why are you keeping it in a link list rather than an array? You know, just basically like: why are you doing this algorithm? Why are you using this data structure? And sometimes you can explain it like, oh well, we have this many items come in, or it's the it's re, it's resorted on a regular basis. Or — and sometimes you go to explain it and you realize the way I'm doing. It isn't the best thing for how this is being used. And so you end up rewriting it and you never would have done that if you hadn't sat down and tried to explain what you were doing to another programmer. And also, by the way, sometimes when you're really stuck trying to find a bug in a chunk of code, you know it's in a chunk of code. Sometimes just rewriting it a whole new way will let you fix the bug without ever knowing what the bug was, and sometimes it lets you fix the bug faster than if you had looked for the bug. Just rewrite the code and the bug disappears.

Interesting stuff, and then something that I don't have kids but has been told to me: that parenting is very similar to teaching, in the sense that it will rapidly reveal what you don't know, because your kids will ask you lots of questions about lots of things, some of which you only know very surface, very, very informally, and then they will also ask you about things that you suddenly realize you don't know. I don't know what the difference between those two things are. I don't know why we call it that. I don't know where that came from. I used to do that with my mom all the time. I was apparently asked her questions all the time, which is why she loved the fact that we had an complete Encyclopedia set and she'd go: why don't you go look it up?

I don't know why don't you go look. That up? And then you tell me — which me I know, have like a little assignment which kept me busy and thankfully out of her hair because she had four other kids to deal with — I would go off, I'd pull an encyclopedia book out, I'd read it, I'd think about it and I'd go back to her. I'm like, well, I think the reason is this. So let me tell you about the one other big lesson I learned by teaching, and it's it. This lesson pervades all my videos, so it's not going to be a shocker to you. Be very afraid of someone who acts like they know everything, and especially someone who's always right. They're always right in all their stor. They never do anything wrong. They always knew ahead of time that something was the best way. The reason you should be afraid of them is nobody's like that. So, basically, they're glossing over something bad.

What I like to do is what I learned from teaching. When I taught both years at UCI, there was some student in the class who went: can you talk about something you did wrong? Can you talk about code that you made that was really bad, or a design that you had to read do?

And those are good questions and I have answers to those that I've done videos on those. So what I love to always ask someone is: how did you mess up? Can you tell me some story where you really messed up and you messed up bad, and then how did you fix it?

Because if they can't answer that question and their answer doesn't include some ownership, so not like. Well, I one time I did this, but I did it because someone else told me to, and then I we had to go. Back and change it, if they don't own it, if they don't say: I did this thing and it was completely wrong, I messed up, I had to fix it. So if they can't think of something they did wrong and they own it, run away from that person, because that's somebody who at some point is going to be right about something that is very wrong.

And that was not only something I learned by teaching, but it's something I like to tell the students to which is the there a lot for you to learn? I don't know everything, you're not going to know everything. Just own up when you mess up and do it a new way. So anyway, that's my thoughts on teaching and I hope you liked it.
