+++
title = "IP Idea: Magic Costs Dearly"
date = "2024-07-26"
id = "ZkPrCighLBM"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["IP"]
summary = "I talk about an IP idea where magic costs the caster dearly to cast. What would a game using that mechanic be like to design and to play?"
references = ["HKu5FiMt3UE"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about another IP idea from my idea book.

Although I don't think it's in this one, I think it's in one in my bookcase. This is the idea that magic should cost the Caster dearly. Now, this is an idea that's been in my book since troa did the Lord of the Rings demo back in 2001, and some of you may already see what the connection is and I'll talk about it when I when I get there. But what made me think about this IP idea was most fantasy RPGs have reduced magic to something almost mundane. It's no different than a fighter swinging a sword or a thief picking a lock. It's just a thing that someone does and it usually is just an excuse to have a different damage type and some particle effects. It's — it's explained away as in know magic, and I always thought that that was something that missed out a lot on what could be done with magic. And, to be fair, um, this has been like this since the original DN D. I mentioned that my original D and campaign was based on Roberty Howard's Conan campaign, but that campaign was fairly low magic.

Not only was magic implied to have been more powerful in the past — and it was beginning to Wayne — but the Wizards that did cast magic had had spent dearly for it. They've either made a PCT with some The Outer Worlds's creature or they studied their whole life — so they're really old because it took that much learning to just cast a simple spell. Now, in defense of original DN D, there they did have the idea of Spell components and that was something. It was something that I originally started using too in my first uh ad and campaign in high school, where you couldn't cast Fireball if you didn't have bat guano, you couldn't cast identify if you didn't have I think it was — a gem or a goldfish or both or something it was. You needed these Spell components and if you didn't have them you couldn't cast a spell. And not only did this act as a pretty good restriction on how frequently someone could cast a spell, but it cost something. And I think that just running with that idea, just riffing off the idea of components, you could make a really interesting game, because maybe the components are either expensive or hard to get.

Maybe to cast a spell you need the blood of someone, Royal, which could be very hard to get and hard to explain how you're getting it, and could be a bad thing if you accidentally killed a person or, like in DD, maybe you, it requires gemstones and the component is used up. Maybe you cast it into a fire or something. Basically, these are things that would be hard to get or expensive to get. You can even make the components something that part of the game consists in you going to get these components for your spells because it requires, maybe, parts of monsters that have been killed in very particular ways. Like, maybe you need the blood of a dragon that was killed using only silver weapons, or fur from a werewolf that was killed at midnight, and you could either make these absolute rules or you could make it.

The component is as good as you follow the rule. So a werewolf killed it exactly midnight. That's the most powerful thing, but if you killed him at 1: am, it would still work. It just wouldn't be as strong, similarly, if you attacked a dragon with a regular sword and then switched to a silver weapon and use that to kill it, the blood would still work. It just wouldn't be as strong and you can make a whole game about getting these components, trying to get the strongest components it would be a real interesting game right there with that Twist on the rule. But then I started talking, or then I started thinking about real cost, like things that the player would really care about, not as much the Char player character, but the player would be like: I'm not doing that. Some of it would be Health costs.

Casting a spell damages you. That would really make you think twice about casting a spell, especially a powerful spell which in theory could damage you a lot. Maybe you can't even cast some spells because your health isn't high enough. That would kind of explain why some Mages want a high Constitution. They want a big Health pool to draw from. You could even extend it to saying maybe casting a spell damages the player character and his party, meaning it would be a group decision. Do you really want me to cast a fireball because we're all taking 10 hit points from the casting? That would be an interesting thing right there. Another one would be experience points, maybe casting a spell literally drains XP from you.

Now D and D Third Edition did that for C crafting items and I loved it. I'm on record of saying I think that was brilliant because it's an incredibly nuanced system.

You have to spend XP to make an item but you can't spend uh XP, more XP than you have available in that level. Like you can't spend more XP that would drain you into losing a level. This, idea, was really good for two reasons. One, it explained why certain items could only be made by high level casters, because they had enough XP in their current level XP Bank to create that spell, to create that item. It also explains why Wizards, who seem to have this restriction on how many spells they can cast a day, don't go.

Hey, just give me a few months. I'm going to make like a dozen wand of magic missiles. They don't, because that would literally drain all their XP. So I like that and I'm like: why didn't they use that for spells? I mean, imagine a spell that would drain a ton of your XP to cast. You think twice about casting it. You could have a ton of spells that you could cast. But you really want to be judicious, like: do I really need this spell? Do I really need to throw a spell to open that lock when the thief could do it and not lose part of his XP?

A similar cost. To that would be age, now again, D and D did this with the wish spell. If you actually follow the rules in ad and D for wish, it said it should have aged your character, I think 3 years every time they cast wish. That really would affect your character over time because there were also rules in the DM's guide for what happens to your character. When they get older they start to lose points of strength and Constitution. I think they gain wisdom, but if you're not a cleric you may not care about that. But that's something that hurts and also a wish can't undo it. A wish can't undo the effects of its own cost to cast and if you combine that with the XP cost, imagine casting wish and it aged you a few years and drained most of the XP. You have that level. That would be.

Scary, but then there's like a really um, bigger thing than XP or age. What if it drained your soul? What if you're born with so much Soul, Spirit, whatever you want to call it — and casting a spell uses a little bit of that. More powerful spells use a lot more of it. What this means is you only have so much soul to use and when you use it up, something happens: maybe you die, maybe you become corrupted.

Now do you see the Lord of the Rings connection? Lord of the Rings use this for their powerful Magics, that imbuing items with magic actually use a portion of the soul of the Caster. That's why saon had part of his spirit in the ring. So that's why destroying the ring — destroyed him. In our Lord of the Rings demo we had certain powerful magic items corrupt you and when you filled your corruption bar, you just became under the control of suron. But you could do other things. You could say it would kill you, or you become a completely corrupted um creature and you're no longer under player control. Or you could say you become monstrous and it's still. You're still playable, but you're now evil. You also have an evil appearance, maybe you're visibly changed.

Maybe you grow horns or bat wings or fangs and Claws. People know you're monstrous and your alignment changes. Or if you don't have alignment, there are certain things you can't do anymore, like maybe your character is no longer capable of healing, maybe your character um loses XP when doing good deeds or something like that. So the game changes tremendously for you when you become soulless. Now, no matter what of these rules you use, you have to think of a few things.

One would people even want to play a game like this? I think it's interesting and somewhat challenging to design a game that people would want to play with these restrictions. Another thing, though, to think is: would people pick a spellcaster? If I could be a fighter and a thief in a game like this, why wouldn't I do that rather than be a spellcaster?

Well, there could be some things that on spellcasting can do. Maybe there's some damage types that only spellcasting can do. Maybe there are certain things in the world, like raising the dead, that can only be done with magic. Or you could just design your game from the very beginning to the — make the player a spellcaster.

That's, the thing. That's how it starts.

The player is a spellcaster. Everything else about their character they can make, but they're a spellcaster, and so that's just the rules that. This game goes through, so then you have to think about what spells do you want to cast, how does it cost you and how are you going to juggle that cost to try to get through the story of this game as a spellcaster?

Now, obviously, I never made a game using this, I just took a lot of notes. It's one of the many IP ideas I have, so I'm throwing it out there to see if any of you want to make a game like that that Uncle Tim could play. Let Uncle Tim play your game, you figure it out and then I'll play your game. So anyway, I hope you like this and I hope you think it's an interesting idea, if, just to think about, if not to try to make a game with.
