+++
title = "Definitions Are Hard (aka Why A Game Director Is Necessary)"
date = "2024-12-05"
id = "zX7SZWTj5_w"
status = "transcript"
tags = ["Game Director", "Leadership"]
summary = "Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about how definitions are hard and I'm going to subtitle this — why game director is necessary."
references = ["F7uaMQnMsvI", "sYZCYDRQtSs", "85trmtqR-s8", "XSKxD6v06P4"]
+++

Hi everyone. It's me, Tim. Today I want to talk about how definitions are hard and I'm going to subtitle this — why game director is necessary.

What I'm going to talk about today is why it is so incredibly hard to define something, a term, a concept, an object. People frequently argue because — not because they believe different things, but because they're using different definitions of words, of Concepts, and they're kind of talking past each other, and this happens a lot in the game industry and some of you are probably going — it's not hard to define a term. That's how you start, you define your terms and then you move on from there. No, it is really hard to define something and people will disagree on the most basic, fundamental of definitions. So I want to tell you a story first before I dive into the game development parts of here. Really, Tim, tell a story, so the very first day of an AI class I had in college, the teacher posed a question to the class, and this was a 90-minute class and this is all we talked about.

What he said was: I want you to define a cup. What is a cup? And he said: and just put a um restriction: you have to Define it in a way that we could Pro program a computer to follow your rule, so it can't be full of other definitions of things or other concepts of things that a computer would have no idea. What it is has to be a very specific definition. And he said: here's what I'm going to do: you guys are going to throw out a definition, I'll write it on the board and then I will throw out counter examples and then you guys can think for a while and we can change the definition. We're try to hone in on the definition of a cup. So almost immediately Somebody went: that's easy.

A cup is a concave object that can hold liquid. And he wrote it on the board and then immediately turned around and, WR, so like a swimming pool is a cup. And uh, and the kid was like: no, no, and he goes, it is a concave object that holds liquid, it is a, it meets your definition perfectly. And so the kid was like: so somebody else went: oh, it's a concave object that can hold liquid, that you can hold. And so the professor added that you can hold, to the end of the definition, and then turned around and said: oh, like a bucket. And you know, then that person was like H, and so people were thinking about it. And then, um, some woman went: well, wait a minute, it can only hold a few ounces of liquid. So all the previous definition: it can, it's a.

Concave object — can hold a liquid that you can hold, and it only holds a few ounces of liquid. And so he added that to the definition. And then he turned around and he said: okay, so, like a plate, plates generally are concave, they have a little Rim, a little edge around it and they only hold a little bit of liquid. And everybody was like no, this led to just a sequence of repeated definitions, of trying to hone in on exactly what a cup was. It led to discussions of minimum and maximum dimension, as well as a range of slopes for the concavity. It couldn't be too shallow, but it couldn't be too steep either, because at one point I remember somebody defined it as minimum this and then went, oh, a test tube, like no, so it just.

It just kept going. Um, now what's interesting is like I told you, this was a 90minut class of college students who'd already studied engineering and higher math and humanities and programming and just all these things, and they struggled for 90 minutes to write a definition for the word cup that all cups fit into and no cups didn't. I remember handles came up at some point and then he said: here's, what about little teacups that don't have handles? It was just, it was a constant stream of counter example definition counter example, definition, counter example. It turns out — and the professor knew this — it is very difficult to come up with a definition even for the most simplistic common, middle — of the road, non-extreme objects. Paradoxically, sometimes something extreme is a little easier to Define because it's a narrower um specific thing. But even those can be hard to Define. I know, uh, and I'll.

Put a link below — I did a video where I said I'm going to try to Define an RPG, because people argue to this day what an RPG is. Is it, is this game, an RPG, or is it something else with RPG elements? So what I did is I made a checklist of what makes to me an RPG. Because, by the way, once you get into something like this, that's not a concrete object, like a cup, it's got elements of subjectivity in it. So I made a checklist and I called it a Continuum of things. So the more of these things you have, the more of these things a game has, the more of what I consider to be an RPG. The fewer you have, the less of an RPG you are, because even then people would disagree on where, on the Continuum, something stops being an RPG. Like if I made a list of 10 things, does it stop being an RPG when it only has four of them?

How, about two of them? What if it has eight of them?

People disagree where in the Continuum something stops being an RPG. It's just a crazy stupid thing, and this is true for any anything you want to Define. This is true for any amount of people. Two people can disagree on something. This is why I've always felt that committees make bad games, because if you think you can get a committee of people, a group of people, to agree on a definition and then from there to a whole bunch of game features that depend on definitions, you've never been in a highlevel game design meeting. The best you can really do with the committee is reach consensus, and consensus is where everybody's like: uh, okay, it's not the worst thing, but we accept.

It. Sidebar.

That's how carbine got named. We all put in names we loved, but there was always somebody who hated what somebody else loved. So we ended up with the name for the company that the nobody hated but also nobody liked, so we ended up named carbine. Nobody liked that name, and so you may go. Why were we name that? Because nobody hated it.

Try making a video game with people like that kind of night marish. This is why game directors are necessary, um, and I highly recommend that you watch all the game director videos I have below.

Um, I'll talk. There's a bunch of links, because what a game director does is a game director says the buck stops here. We are going to stop talking about this and I'm going to be the final say on what this thing is. The conversation's over, a decision's been made. We can continue going.

What's great about this — and I talked about it in one of my Fallout videos and I can't find which one — I mentioned that just having me as the project leader on Fallout sometimes meant that arguments got resolved before they came to me, because if, like a designer and an artist were arguing on the correct way of doing something they knew, if they brought it to me, they would have no idea how I'd resolve it, because I used to tell them: I'm just going to pick the one that's easier for me to code. But they didn't know what how to code, so they didn't know what that meant. So they tried to agree with each other before it got out of control and they brought up to me — and I'm like we're doing this because I can code that this afternoon now I have worked in situations with multiple game directors. I mentioned The Outer Worlds — Leonard and I were both game directors on that — but that's only. That only worked because we'd worked together in the past and we knew each other really well. But the main reason it worked was because we had very clearly defined roles.

If it was program or system mechanics, the buck stopped with me. If it was art or narrative, the buck stopped with Leonard and we didn't try to step on each other. Now, we both worked on story together, but that was something we did right at the beginning and then Leonard kind of took off with it.

So I have tried to talk, like I mentioned, about what makes a good GD, and there's links Below on how to how to be a good game director — Parts one and two — and also how. A game director and ego, how those two things. Interact and how you manage that, but remember that, just like an RPG, it's a Continuum. There's a whole range of good game directors out There's no one way to be a good game director, and there's also there's no way to say, well, this person doesn't do this thing, so here or she is going to be a bad game director. No, it's a, it's a Continuum and, like I said, sometimes being a game, a good game director means having people decided among themselves for fear that you, as the game director, will make the a decision they both don't like.

So, just like carbine name. Sometimes people will work things out just because there's someone above them who go. If you don't work this out, I'll decide. Now, some of you out there going. This is never going to apply to me because I'm a solo developer.

You're right if you're a. Solo developer, you will never have to make decisions like this. You're going to ship your game, though, and people who play your game are going to fundamentally disagree with decisions you made, and, as you should be able to tell from all the videos I've made, there is absolutely no Game feature that everybody decide, everybody agrees, is 100% good, 100% bad. But I warn you, once you get past solo game development, even if it's just two people working on the game, they will disagree, and you need someone who can make the final decision. If they're even with two people and you decided we're just going to have equal, say you're going to get stuck.

One of the reasons I like troa having three people was if we couldn't decide something, we it went down to a vote. You know it was always going to have a majority. It was either three against zero or two against one. There were no other ways that could work out. So what do I want you to walk away with?

Knowing from this video? Two things: one, don't always assume people will agree even on the most basic fundamental terms of your game. And two, always have someone who can resolve and make the final decision because, remember, people can't even can agree what a cup is.
